WASHINGTON, DC – The solution to the crisis in Ukraine lies in part in Syria.
It is time for US President Barack Obama to demonstrate that he can order the offensive use of force in circumstances other than secret drone attacks or covert operations.
The result will change the strategic calculus not only in Damascus, but also in Moscow, not to mention Beijing and Tokyo.
Many argue that Obama’s climb-down from his threatened missile strikes against Syria last August emboldened Russian President Vladimir Putin to annex Crimea.
But it is more likely that Putin acted for domestic reasons – to distract Russians’ attention from their country’s failing economy and to salve the humiliation of watching pro-European demonstrators oust the Ukrainian government he backed.
Regardless of Putin’s initial motivations, he is now operating in an environment in which he is quite certain of the parameters of play.
He is weighing the value of further dismemberment of Ukraine, with some pieces either joining Russia or becoming Russian vassal states, against the pain of much stronger and more comprehensive economic sanctions.
Western use of force, other than to send arms to a fairly hapless Ukrainian army, is not part of the equation.
In the case of Syria, the US, the world’s largest and most flexible military power, has chosen to negotiate with its hands tied behind its back for more than three years.
This is no less of a mistake in the case of Russia, with a leader like Putin who measures himself and his fellow leaders in terms of crude machismo.
It is time to change Putin’s calculations, and Syria is the place to do it.
Through a combination of mortars that shatter entire city quarters, starvation, hypothermia, and now barrel bombs that spray nails and shrapnel indiscriminately, President Bashar al-Assad’s forces have seized the advantage.
“Realist” foreign policy analysts openly describe Assad as the lesser evil compared to the Al Qaeda-affiliated members of the opposition; others see an advantage in letting all sides fight it out, tying one another down for years.
Moreover, the Syrian government does appear to be slowly giving up its chemical weapons, as it agreed last September to do.
The problem is that if Assad continues to believe that he can do anything to his people except kill them with chemicals, he will exterminate his opponents, slaughtering everyone he captures and punishing entire communities, just as his father, Hafez al-Assad, massacred the residents of Hama in 1982.
Since the beginning of the Syrian conflict, Assad has fanned fears of what Sunni opposition forces might do to the Alawites, Druze, Christians and other minorities if they won.
It would either force the regime back to the negotiating table with a genuine intention of reaching a settlement, or at least make it clear that Assad will not have a free hand in re-establishing his rule.
It is impossible to strike Syria legally so long as Russia sits on the United Nations Security Council, given its ability to veto any resolution authorizing the use of force.
But even Russia agreed in February to Resolution 2139, designed to compel the Syrian government to increase flows of humanitarian aid to starving and wounded civilians.
Among other things, Resolution 2139 requires that “all parties immediately cease all attacks against civilians, as well as the indiscriminate employment of weapons in populated areas, including shelling and aerial bombardment, such as the use of barrel bombs….”
The US, together with as many countries as will cooperate, could use force to eliminate Syria’s fixed-wing aircraft as a first step toward enforcing Resolution 2139.
“Aerial bombardment” would still likely continue via helicopter, but such a strike would announce immediately that the game has changed.
After the strike, the US, France, and Britain should ask for the Security Council’s approval of the action taken, as they did after NATO’s intervention in Kosovo in 1999.
Equally important, shots fired by the US in Syria will echo loudly in Russia.
The great irony is that Putin is now seeking to do in Ukraine exactly what Assad has done so successfully: portray a legitimate political opposition as a gang of thugs and terrorists, while relying on provocations and lies to turn non-violent protest into violent attacks that then justify an armed response.
Recall that the Syrian opposition marched peacefully under fire for six months before the first units of the Free Syrian Army tentatively began to form.
In Ukraine, Putin would be happy to turn a peaceful opposition’s ouster of a corrupt government into a civil war.
Putin may believe, as Western powers have repeatedly told their own citizens, that NATO forces will never risk the possibility of nuclear war by deploying in Ukraine.
Putting force on the table in resolving the Ukraine crisis, even force used in Syria, is particularly important because economic pressure on Russia, as critical as it is in the Western portfolio of responses, can create a perverse incentive for Putin.
As the Russian ruble falls and foreign investment dries up, the Russian population will become restive, giving him even more reason to distract them with patriotic spectacles welcoming still more “Russians” back to the motherland.
But if the US meets bullets with words, tyrants will draw their own conclusions.
Japan, for example, is now wondering how the US will respond should China manufacture a crisis over the disputed Senkaku Islands.
To lead effectively, in both the national and the global interest, the US must demonstrate its readiness to shoulder the full responsibilities of power.
Striking Syria might not end the civil war there, but it could prevent the eruption of a new one in Ukraine.
LONDON – The budget-cutting austerity program of Britain’s new coalition government has been claiming all the headlines, but David Cameron’s cabinet is breaking with its Labour predecessor in another key area as well: human rights.
Indeed, the human-rights experiment that Tony Blair’s Labour government brought to Britain has failed.
Faulted by some for its inability to prevent “illiberal” anti-terrorism measures, the Human Rights Act is criticized by just as many others for hampering counter-terrorism policy.
Indeed, many people mock the very notion of human rights, which is seen as leading to “loony” concessions that favor criminals and terrorists.
Overall, the reaction of both press and public is one of disillusion and/or cynicism.
Britain famously has no written constitution, or, until recently, anything resembling a modern Bill of Rights.
The concept of universal human rights is literally foreign – enshrined in the broad-brush principles of the European Convention on Human Rights, whose court sits in Strasbourg.
Until recently, anyone who wished to bring a human-rights case against the British government had to go to France.
With fanfare and idealism – reflected in the slogan “Rights Brought Home” – the Human Rights Act came into effect in 2000.
But the high-minded liberalism of the then-elite had a practical point as well: should the government have any soiled linen, it should be laundered in British courts rather than be aired before a panel of international judges.
Yet the Act is unloved by the British public, which never engaged with the process.
As Tony Blair’s wife, Cherie Booth, herself a human rights lawyer, lamented, “the majority of people feel that human rights are not relevant to their lives.”
There is a lesson here: if it’s not broken, don’t fix it.
When compared with human-rights abuses that truly affect humanity, the complaints dealt with by the British courts are small beer.
Which child goes to what school or what public housing is offered to which asylum seeker will be of concern to many people (and views will differ).
But using the broad brush of “human rights” to resolve such issues trivializes the concept.
After all, what responsible public body wants to be accused of violating human rights?
Indeed, the threat of human-rights litigation has made providers of public services overly cautious and defensive.
This has led the popular press to howl that we now live in a costly, bureaucratic, and inefficient “human rights culture” – a charge with profound political resonance.
Before he became Prime Minister, Cameron called for the Human Rights Act to be replaced with something more “British.”
Paradoxically, some deem human rights to be wholly inefficacious where their recognition is most required.
Many MPs who backed the incorporation of the European human-rights convention into British law came to view formal recognition of human rights as a grave inconvenience when faced with Al Qaeda-inspired terrorism.
In short, having brought rights home, the Blair government ended up trying to hide them under the sofa.
This conundrum is symbolized by the debate over detaining terrorism suspects without charge or trial.
Initially, Blair attempted to force through detention without charge for up to 90 days.
Parliament settled on 28 days – still the longest such period in the Western world.
So much, then, for Article 6 of the European Convention, which provides that everyone charged with a criminal offense has the right “to be informed promptly” of the nature of the accusation against him.
So much, also, for Magna Carta, which provides that “No freeman shall be taken or imprisoned…but by lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land.”
The fact is that any piece of legislation purporting to embody human rights is entirely vulnerable to a political system in which parliament is supreme.
Rights brought home one day; detention for a month without charge the next.
Indeed, even when the cause of human rights is being advanced, the Human Rights Act is now overlooked.
In May, in his first major policy speech, Deputy Prime Minister Nick Clegg announced the sweeping away of the “Big Brother” state that Blair had constructed: no more ID cards or national identity register, new restrictions on the storage of DNA, tighter regulation of the closed-circuit television surveillance that had made the British the most monitored people on earth, and so on.
All this and not one mention of “human rights” – an absence that reflects the political sensitivity of human rights in Britain today, and that tacitly acknowledges that when the stakes are high, the Human Rights Act cannot be relied upon.
Where, then, does that leave the Cameron government’s supposed extirpation of Big Brother?
One way forward would be to go further than Blair by ring-fencing certain principles and creating some form of constitutional court to defend them.
But the cost of such rigid rules may be high, and their effectiveness, as witnessed by the vagaries of the United States’ record on human rights, is less fool-proof than is sometimes imagined.
So, perhaps in a mature democracy, human rights should be dignified by actions rather than words.
Instead of introducing more legislation that is tainted both in the popular imagination and in its utility, Britain could, after all, trust its constitution to act as and when required to safeguard liberty and fair play.
For good or ill, democratic sentiment will win out, and Britain’s human-rights record, while imperfect, remains strong.
BERLIN – While Europe remains preoccupied with its own slow-motion crisis, and other global powers continue to be mesmerized by the bizarre spectacle of European officials’ myriad efforts to rescue the euro (and thus the global financial system), clouds of war are massing over Iran once more.
For years, Iran has been pursuing both a nuclear program and the development of long-range missiles, which points to only one conclusion: the country’s leaders are intent on building nuclear weapons, or at least on reaching the technological threshold beyond which only a single political decision is required to achieve that end.
The latter course would arguably keep Iran within the scope of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), to which it is a signatory.
Otherwise, Iran’s nuclear and missile programs would be a pointless waste of money.
The country has only one civilian nuclear reactor, with fuel rods supplied by Russia, and the Iranian technology now being developed cannot be used in it.
But uranium enrichment makes a lot of sense if you want a nuclear weapon; indeed, for that purpose, enrichment is indispensable.
Moreover, Iran is building a heavy-water reactor, supposedly for research purposes, but which is also needed to build a plutonium bomb.
Iran has, in violation of the NPT, hidden substantial parts of this program.
The country has also spent millions of dollars on illegal purchases of enrichment technology and nuclear-weapon designs from the Pakistani nuclear scientist and black marketeer A.Q. Khan, the “Father of the Pakistani bomb.”
Iran tried to conceal these transactions for years, until its cover was blown when Libya began to cooperate with the West and exposed the Khan network.
An Iran armed with nuclear weapons (or one political decision away from possessing them) would drastically alter the Middle East’s strategic balance.
At best, a nuclear-arms race would threaten to consume this already-unstable region, which would endanger the NPT, with far-reaching global consequences.
At worst, nuclear weapons would serve Iran’s “revolutionary” foreign policy in the region, which the country’s leaders have pursued since the birth of the Islamic Republic in 1979.
The combination of an anti-status quo foreign policy and nuclear weapons and missiles is a nightmare not only for Israel, which at least has second-strike capabilities, but also for Iran’s non-nuclear Arab neighbors and Turkey.
Indeed, the Gulf States, including Saudi Arabia, feel more existentially threatened by Iran than Israel does.
Europe’s security profile, too, would change dramatically if Iran were to possess nuclear warheads and long-range missiles.
All attempts at negotiations have led nowhere, with Iran continuing to enrich uranium and improve its nuclear technology.
Sanctions, while useful, work only in the very long term, and a change in the balance of power within the country is not foreseeable in the short term.
So it is only a matter of time – and not much time – until Iran’s neighbors and the international community will confront a fateful choice: either accept Iran as a nuclear power, or decide that the mere prospect, as it becomes more realistic, is leading to war.
President Barack Obama has already made clear that the United States will not accept Iran as a nuclear power under any circumstances.
The same is true of Israel and Iran’s Arab neighbors in the Gulf.
The Israeli government recently suggested that Iran would reach the nuclear threshold within nine months, and Iran could become a major issue in the long run-up to the US presidential election in November 2012.
And it is difficult to imagine that Israel’s current government will stand by idly while Iran becomes a nuclear power (or a nuclear quasi-power).
On the other hand, talk of military intervention – which, under the circumstances, would largely boil down to air strikes – is cheap.
There are grave doubts about whether the Iranian nuclear program could be eliminated from the air.
In fact, with large parts of the world most likely condemning any attack, military intervention could clear the diplomatic path to an Iranian bomb.
It is better not to dwell on what the Middle East might look like after this kind of confrontation.
Iranian opposition forces would likely be the first victim of Western military action, and, elsewhere in the region, the Arab Spring would likely be submerged under a massive anti-Western wave of solidarity with Iran.
The region would be pushed back into violence and terror, instead of continuing its transformation from the bottom up.
The effects on the global economy would be no less significant, to say nothing of the humanitarian consequences.
A last-ditch diplomatic solution appears unlikely, given that the nuclear question plays a decisive role in the Iranian regime’s factional struggles, in which anyone favoring compromise can be considered the loser.
Moreover, Iran’s leaders seem to assume that the country is too big and too strong to be subdued by sanctions or air strikes.
Historically, the road to disaster has usually been paved with good intentions and grave errors of judgment.
That could happen again in 2012, when miscalculations on all sides could clear the path to war or a nuclear Iran – or, quite realistically, to both.
Further escalation in the Middle East will culminate in these wretched alternatives sooner rather than later, unless a diplomatic solution is found (or unless diplomacy can at least buy time).
In the absence of any viable route to US diplomatic engagement with Iran, the burden of organizing, convening, and conducting such highly sensitive negotiations falls on Europe.
And European leaders, as Iran knows very well, have other things on their minds.
CAMBRIDGE – The Standard and Poor’s 500 index of share prices has fluctuated wildly during 2018 but has returned to nearly the same level that it was at the beginning of the year.
The absence of a net fall for the year reflects the combination of a rise in corporate profits and a 12% decline in the price-earnings ratio.
And the fall in the price-earnings ratio is an indication of the likely evolution of share prices in the next few years.
The price/earnings (P/E) ratio is now 40% higher than its historic average.
Its rise reflects the very low interest rates that have prevailed since the US Federal Reserve cut the federal funds interest rate to near zero in 2008.
As long-term interest rates rise, however, share prices will be less attractive to investors and will decline.
A key sign of this is that the yield on ten-year Treasury bonds has doubled in the past two years.
But, at a little over 3%, it is still barely above the rate of inflation, which averaged 2.9% over the past 12 months.
First, the Fed is raising the short-term federal funds rate and projects that it will increase from a little over 2% to about 3.5% by the end of 2020.
Second, the very large projected budget deficits will cause long-term rates to rise in order to induce investors to absorb the increased volume of government debt.
According to the Congressional Budget Office, the volume of publicly held debt will rise from about $15 trillion now to nearly $30 trillion by the end of the decade.
Third, the very low and falling rate of unemployment will cause inflation to accelerate.
Investors will demand higher yields on bonds to compensate for the resulting loss of purchasing power.
It would not be surprising if the rate on ten-year Treasury bonds rises to 5% or more over the next few years.
With an inflation rate of 3%, the real yield will be back to a normal historic level of over 2%.
This normalization of the ten-year interest rate could cause the P/E ratio to return to its historical benchmark.
A decline of that magnitude, from its current level of 40% above the historic average, would cause household wealth to shrink by about $8 trillion.
The historic relationship between household wealth and consumer spending implies that the annual level of household consumption would decline by about 1.5% of GDP.
That fall in household demand, and the induced decline in business investment, would push the US economy into recession.
Most recessions in the United States have been relatively short and shallow, with durations of less than a year between the beginning of the downturn and the date when the recovery begins.
The recession that began in 2007 was much longer and deeper because of the collapse of financial institutions.
The faster and more robust recoveries that characterized most previous recessions reflected aggressive countercyclical monetary policy by the Fed, which cut the short-term interest rate very sharply.
But if a recession begins as soon as 2020, the Fed will not be in a position to reduce the federal funds rate significantly.
Indeed, the Fed now projects the federal funds rate at the end of 2020 to be less than 3.5%.
In that case, monetary policy would be unable to combat an economic downturn.
The alternative is to rely on fiscal stimulus, achieved by cutting taxes or increasing spending.
But with annual budget deficits of $1 trillion and government debt heading toward 100% of GDP, a stimulus package would be politically difficult to enact.
As a result, the next economic downturn is likely to be deeper and longer than would otherwise be the case.
If the government at that time chooses to use fiscal policy, the future debt-to-GDP ratio will rise further above 100% of GDP, forcing long-term interest rates even higher.
Perhaps it takes an ex-KGB spy for a Kremlin ruler to play diplomatic poker with skill.
Indeed, President Vladimir Putin shows as much mastery at international diplomacy as he does in handling Russian domestic affairs.
Not since Gustav Stresemann, Weimar Germany's foreign minister, played the Soviet Union and the West off against each other, has a leader with so weak a hand played his cards so effectively.
Putin's latest moves in North Korea, and his careful tap-dance over Iraq, are just the latest examples.
Diplomacy, in its traditional form, was never Russia's strong suit.
Even when part of alliances--the Triple Alliance with Bismarck's Germany and the Habsburg Empire, or the Entente with France before the First World War--Russia was kept at a distance.
Russian leaders typically dealt with their fear of isolation--and encirclement--by going out of their way to appear threatening.
In the Soviet era, the distances between Russia and its neighbors became unbridgeable chasms, with the USSR ringed either by hostile states or weak, servile ones.
Stalin wasted no time in antagonizing Communist China after Mao's revolution of 1949.
Not until Boris Yeltsin did Russia make its first steps to bridge these divides.
But Yeltsin could never get over Russia's lost superpower status; his periodic growls to assert Russia's wounded pride ultimately made him seem unreliable.
In Yugoslavia, former Premier Victor Chernomyrdin joined Finnish President Matti Ahtissari in resolving the Kosovo crisis of 1999.
But this hardly amounted to recognition of Russia's indispensability; after all, NATO troops entered Kosovo without Russian consent.
But this recognition is not a confession of weakness; instead, it reflects his clear-sighted analysis of Russia's current predicament, and of the country's need to create, recreate, and sustain friendly relations among all of its neighbors if lost influence is to be regained.
Since Putin took the reigns of power in 2000 he has become almost everybody's best friend--Belarus's lunatic strongman Aleksander Lukashenko, US President George W. Bush, Germany's Gerhard Schroeder, Japan's Junichiro Koizumi, and China's Jiang Zemin.
Even North Korea's erratic leader, the hermit Kim Jong Il, who never travels outside his country, has visited Putin twice in recent years.
In the summer of 2002, the North Korean leader visited Russia to learn about "non-intrusive"--that is, not entirely Western--capitalism, while riding in an armored train on the Trans-Siberian railway.
Kim seemed to reason that, while Russia was no longer Soviet, it retained enough socialist overtones to work with his country.
The benefit of this "educational experiment" was that Putin became one of the few people to whom Kim Jong Il listens.
Even as he hosted Kim in Moscow, Russian diplomats in Pyongyang were helping to protect an American spy in North Korea.
Previously spurned by America in its attempts to use its longstanding contacts in Asia, this assistance appears to have convinced America that Russia can be of real help in its diplomacy with North Korea.
Final negotiations over North Korea's nuclear ambitions will undoubtedly need to take place between the US and Kim Jong Il.
What Putin may be able to provide is the diplomatic cover the US president needs to maintain his pose of not negotiating directly with the North Koreans.
This will allow President Bush to avoid seeming to surrender to the threat of nuclear blackmail.
As a diplomatic practitioner, Putin has learned history's lessons and is determined not to see his country ringed by enmity.
Instead of Russia's borders draining his country's economy, he envisions Russia as a transit point between east and west, and also as an engine of growth for countries in search of the heavy industrial equipment Russia makes.
A rail link between South Korea and Siberia, to carry Korean and Japanese goods west and Russian resource exports east, may be but one positive result of any successful deal he may broker on the Korean peninsula.
Of course, some of the old suspicions about Russian motives linger in the West, most particularly over Iraq (where Lukoil, Russia's biggest oil company, recently signed a new deal to develop Iraqi oil fields).
But Putin's interventions in the UN Security Council over Iraq have been far more moderate than, say, those of France and Germany, two of America's historic allies.
This is so even though Russia has vital national interests to protect in Iraq, including real fears about regional instability spreading into Russia's south, with its millions of Muslim citizens.
For too long Russia practiced either the diplomacy of the thug or that of the Byzantine.
The first made potential partners recoil in fear, the second made them shrink in confusion.
But a spy's stock-in-trade is recruiting and nurturing collaborators.
Those skills are now being put on display by Russia's spymaster president.
NAIROBI – Kenya’s fiercely contested presidential election in March, and its disputed outcome, has left the victor, Uhuru Kenyatta, with a daunting challenge: to unite a country riven with ethnic violence and distrust.
Although this election was accompanied by far less violence than the previous presidential vote in 2007, the opposition candidate Raila Odinga’s second consecutive defeat has only re-enforced his supporters’ fears that they are once again being cheated out of power.
Kenyatta, a member of the dominant Kikuyu ethnic group, says that he wants to heal the country’s divisions, echoing the promise of his predecessor, Mwai Kibaki.
There is a simple way to start: combat the corruption and nepotism that characterize so much state employment.
Kenyatta assumes power a half-century after his father, Jomo Kenyatta, led Kenya to independence.
The anniversary provides a reason to reflect on some of the country’s achievements and failings, especially in the field of education – the key to economic opportunity and professionalization of the public sector.
The post-independence government thus found itself having to hire vast numbers of teachers, many of them unqualified, to cope with the influx of black students attending school for the first time.
In fact, many of them can now only find work in neighboring countries such as South Sudan, which needs to fill shortages left by decades of conflict.
Investment in Kenya’s education system, along with economic reforms, and (until recently) relative political stability has undoubtedly helped the economy, which has grown by around 4-5% annually over the past decade, following long periods of stagnation.
By some definitions, around one-quarter of the country’s 44 million people are in the middle class.
Compared with the rest of the region, the country’s key sectors – including education, transport, communications, agriculture, and tourism – are professionally managed and the envy of much of East Africa.
But the emergence of an increasingly educated population has also intensified the need for more skilled jobs.
The government has promised to create jobs, but that is only part of the battle; it must also reform the way such jobs are filled.
Kenyans typically complain that key positions are not advertised nationally (as required by law) until the employer has already found the “ideal” candidate.
Instead, vacancies are listed internally as temporary contracts, obviating the need for a national search.
This makes it easy for a manager to hire a relative or friend, usually from a favored ethnic group.
The candidate is then best placed to benefit when the temporary post is upgraded and advertised as a permanent position.
There are even instances in which two managers will contrive to hire each other’s relatives to evade nepotism charges.
The system is hardest on first-generation graduates who lack a highly placed relative to help them into the workforce; they are often left with no option but to pay a hefty bribe to advance their careers.
Unsurprisingly, the way state jobs are filled, from the presidency down, has become a source of deep and widespread bitterness.
The Kenyatta government could go a long way toward addressing the problem with one very practical measure: establishing and supporting an independent watchdog to audit hiring and promotion decisions in official agencies.
The vetting process that Kenyans observed being applied to recent cabinet appointments should be extended throughout the public sector (and also to private entities that win state contracts).
An independent watchdog would require all employers to demonstrate that their hiring practices are transparent, competitive, and meritocratic.
Its very existence, and the threat of random investigations, would serve as an effective deterrent against malpractice – just as random audits deter tax evaders.
Whistleblowers, encouraged to come forward by legal protections enshrined in the agency’s founding legislation, would provide leads for the investigators.
Kenyatta has a chance to steer Kenya away from the ethnic tensions that have plagued its society and economy.
By introducing and implementing fairness and transparency to public-sector recruitment, and ensuring that appointments are based on talent, not ethnic or family connections, Kenyans may become less fearful about their political leaders’ origins.
They may also grow more confident that their skills will be properly deployed in a fast-growing economy, further spreading the prosperity that many fellow citizens have only recently started to enjoy.
MADRID – When Emmanuel Macron was elected president of France last year, he was presented as a kind of European savior, a wunderkind who had burst onto the French political scene just in the nick of time.
Now, many are asking, with a combination of schadenfreude and defeatism, whether Macron’s star burned too bright – and is thus destined to burn out fast.
But this focus on Macron’s record so far threatens to overshadow his crucial message about the future of European democracy.
Macron won the French presidency not by appropriating veiled nationalist-populist messages, as Mark Rutte did to hold on to power in the Netherlands, but by championing a positive and robust pro-European platform.
With his ambitious calls for European unity and dogged support of liberal democracy, Macron inspired hope that the wave of anti-European populism had crested, and that real progress was on the horizon.
Germany’s federal election last September delivered a weak mandate for Chancellor Angela Merkel, and established the far-right Alternative für Deutschland as a real political force.
This was followed in February by the ignominious resignation of European cheerleader Martin Schulz as leader of the Social Democrats.
In Italy’s general election in March, the populist Five Star Movement and the far-right League party together won more than 50% of the vote.
And, in Hungary earlier this month, Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, the poster child of illiberal democracy, secured a third term – and the chance to reshape the constitution – with a large majority.
Clearly, Macron’s victory did not mark the beginning of a new era of European politics so much as the beginning of yet another chapter in the ongoing struggle for the future of Europe.
Macron delivered this very message earlier this month while addressing the European Parliament in Strasbourg , where he declared that “European democracy is our best chance,” and called for a “new European sovereignty” that would protect and provide for the European Union’s citizens.
He also addressed directly the issue of complacency: “I don’t want to belong to a generation of sleepwalkers that has forgotten its own past.
I want to belong to a generation that has decided forcefully to defend its democracy.”
Macron’s rousing call to arms is the latest development in a diplomatic offensice that included hobnobbing with Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman and frank discussions about EU-Turkey relations with Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
That effort is now continuing, with the jupiterian Macron meeting the mercurial Donald Trump in Washington, DC, this week.
Earlier this month, both leaders – along with British Prime Minister Theresa May – ordered strikes on Syrian military installations, following a chemical-weapons attack on rebel-held territory allegedly carried out by President Bashar al-Assad’s forces.
Some argue that Macron’s soaring pro-European rhetoric and outsize international personality amount to a ploy to boost his popularity within France.
After all, his attempts to reform the French economy, public sector, and labor markets – not to mention his perceived elitist pretensions and imperialist tendencies – have produced a swift and severe backlash.
Virtually all politicians try to leverage their international status to boost their standing at home.
Yet even Macron’s supporters fail adequately to defend that message, instead getting caught up in the practical challenges ahead.
This is the “yes, but” crowd: “Yes he is right about Europe,” they say, “but he has to reform the French economy first,” or “he can’t succeed without more German support.”
To be an engine of change in Europe, France must undergo a deep structural transformation, which, as student protests at Sciences Po and railway strikes across France show, will be very difficult.
And to reform the EU, Macron will need German backing, which may not be in the offing, given the apparent turn by Merkel’s coalition away from deeper European integration.
The danger is here is that by tying the message too tightly to Macron and his achievements, we may devalue the underlying ideas.
France might not get its act together, and Merkel might not leap to reform Europe’s monetary union.
In his Strasbourg speech, Macron set out a potent agenda: the EU must convince its citizens that it deserves their support, by engaging with them directly and offering a compelling narrative that emphasizes the Union’s unwavering commitment to liberal democracy.
Rather than poke holes in Macron’s methods or circumstances, Europeans should view his message as a challenge.
Everyone who believes in the EU must step up to strengthen it, not just by offering ideas, but also by fighting for their realization.
Macron might be a talented soloist, but what Europe needs now is a chorus.
He’d been itching to throw himself into the 2016 presidential race and do what he could to ensure that Donald Trump wouldn’t succeed him as President of the United States.
It was evident throughout the campaign that he backed his former secretary of state, Hillary Clinton, but he had to wait to declare his support openly until it was certain that Senator Bernie Sanders couldn’t beat her at the convention.
His entry into the campaign came at a time when 56% of Americans approve of his performance – the highest level in a long time.
In 2014, his approval rating dipped to a low of 40%, owing to public discontent with the economy and the Islamic State’s gains in Iraq and Syria.
Democrats running for re-election that year deliberately avoided joint appearances with him; now, they clamor for his attendance at their campaign events.
The first scheduled campaign appearance of Obama and Clinton together was postponed because of the massacre at a gay nightclub in Orlando.
It was rescheduled for July 5, the day, it turned out, that James Comey, Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, unexpectedly held a morning press conference on the FBI’s investigation into Clinton’s handling of State Department emails on her personal server.
While Clinton had been “extremely careless” in handling classified material, Comey said, there wasn’t enough evidence of criminal intent to indict her.
Though it takes days to set up a presidential appearance, conspiracy theorists – and Donald Trump, perhaps the “conspiracy theorist in chief” – had a field day.
Obama, they concluded, was part of an elaborate plot – of which there is no convincing evidence – to let Clinton off the hook legally, and that the campaign appearance was orchestrated to distract people’s attention from Comey’s harsh comments.
Campaigning with Clinton in Charlotte, North Carolina, Obama appeared to be a very happy man, loose and funny.
(That burden is apparent in how Obama’s hair has turned almost entirely gray since 2008.)
And now, as he prepares to leave office, his approval rating stands as a powerful rebuke to the Republicans, who have tried to block him at every turn for the last eight years.
Then, a week later, Obama had to make his 11th trip as president to a US city – this time Dallas – to comfort a community shaken by gun violence and the country’s racial divide.
The murder of five policemen there occurred during a demonstration – one of many held across the country – to protest the recent deaths of two black men shot to death by police after they were detained for minor infractions.
Police violence against African Americans has been commonplace; but widespread use of smartphones, with their ability to record high-quality video, has suddenly made such episodes a frequent feature of the news cycle.
As it happens, Dallas has a model police force, reformed after being one of the most out-of-control in the country, and the murders of the policemen, carried out by a lone former serviceman with apparent mental problems, took place as officers mingled easily with the demonstrators.
Obama has had to struggle with America’s racial divisions, and the killing of innocent African Americans, almost since the beginning of his presidency.
He’s understood since his youth that he couldn’t come across as an “angry black,” even to his white mother.
Indeed, following the arrest in 2009 of Henry Louis Gates Jr., a well-known Harvard professor, as he was trying to enter his own house, Obama’s criticism of the police backfired.
Many also objected when he sympathized with the parents of Trayvon Martin, a teenager shot dead by a self-appointed neighborhood watchman in Florida.
As Obama has been forced over the course of his presidency to find his voice on racial tensions and mass murders, he has made some of the most moving speeches of his presidency.
His anguish – whether for predominantly white schoolchildren gunned down in their Connecticut classroom by a disturbed white youth, or a group of African Americans murdered at their Charleston church by a white neo-Nazi – has clearly been genuine.
And his frustration at his inability to move the US Congress to pass meaningful gun control measures – owing to implacable opposition from the powerful National Rifle Association and its mostly Republican allies – has been as palpable as it is understandable.
Growing appreciation of Obama nowadays may reflect the shortcomings of Clinton and Trump – the most disliked presidential candidates in US history.
But it’s also true that Obama has conducted himself throughout his presidency with confidence, dignity, and a sure wit.
Indeed, there hasn’t been a tone-deaf moment in his two terms in office.
As the presidential campaign approaches the November election, the Republicans will of course continue to attack Obama.
But, barring some unforeseen development, it’s possible that he will remain the country’s most popular political figure until he leaves office.
When China's National People's Congress (NPC) concluded its annual meeting recently, it voted to enshrine protection of human rights and private property in the constitution.
But other major changes in China's development strategies that appear to be taking place have attracted far less notice.
China's current leadership, one year after coming to power, has criticized "the single-minded pursuit of GDP growth" over the past decade and unveiled a new approach to modernization characterized as "balanced, human-centered, and environmentally friendly."
The change in priorities - and outsiders' tendency to overlook it - is not difficult to understand.
The world is fascinated by China's economic miracle, but it is much less interested in the costs associated with the country's 8-9% annual growth rate in the past 25 years.
For instance, the energy consumption of every unit of Chinese industrial output is close to three times the global average.
Similarly, a recent Chinese bestseller, A Survey of Chinese Peasants , reveals the tremendous human costs of China's modernization drive.
The book caught the attention of both the elites and the mass public with its heart-breaking stories of the suffering endured by 900 million farmers and its bold criticism of the government's rural policies.
Beyond the glamorous skyscrapers of Beijing, Shanghai, and other urban centers, the majority of Chinese who live in the countryside have gained little from the material progress of the past two decades.
On the contrary, the initial benefits that peasants gained from the rural reforms of the late 1970's and early 1980's have disappeared; real income among farmers has dropped in recent years as their production costs rise and agricultural prices decline.
In most parts of China, farming can no longer sustain a respectable standard of living.
While average agricultural income grew by 90% in the 1994-97 period, the rural tax burden jumped by 800%.
More than 300 taxes and fees have been imposed on peasants by all levels of government.
For example, some townships demand 14 kinds of fees to register a marriage.
Today, a farmer's annual income is only one-sixth that of an urban dweller's, but he has to pay three times more in taxes.
This comes in addition to many other financial burdens exacted at the local level.
Indeed, 25 years of reforms have changed nothing of China's "one country with two systems" - a model that segregates China's urban centers from its agricultural areas, with development of the former realized at the expense of the latter.
If we use what is called the "Gini coefficient" to measure this income gap, with "0" indicating perfect equality of income distribution and "1" meaning perfect inequality, the number for China is 0.454 in 2002.
India, long known for gross disparities between rich and poor, has a Gini coefficient that has hovered around 0.30 to 0.32 over the past five decades.
A recent study by the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences concluded that China's urban-rural income gap is the worst on earth, maybe only slightly better than Zimbabwe.
The irony here is that China is widely hailed as a success story, while Zimbabwe is generally viewed as a failed state.
Such an unfair distribution of wealth based on economic exploitation, social injustice and political exclusion has caused silent but persistent resistance by Chinese peasants.
They protest, they petition, and they participate in local riots when all other means are exhausted.
As a result, the "peasant question" is now threatening social stability and is potentially explosive in a way reminiscent of when Mao organized his revolution around peasant disaffection with the rural policies of the Nationalist government of Chiang Kai-shek.
In response, Premier Wen Jiabao announced a series of measures during the NPC, ranging from phasing out agricultural taxes over the next five years to measures aimed at increasing farmers' income.
But while official attention to rural poverty is music to the ears of the poor, experience shows that such promises are usually inadequate.
Wen's predecessor, Zhu Ronji, also said that his "biggest headache" was how to reduce the rural tax burden and increase peasant income.
China's government must acknowledge that deep income inequality and rural poverty is no longer exclusively an economic problem, but threatens social peace and political stability.
Unless China commits to greater political openness, allowing the poor and disadvantaged to voice their concerns, represent themselves, and monitor policy implementation, it will continue to be jeopardized by a false and perilous prosperity.
``Failed state'' is a term applied frequently to Afghanistan and is often deemed the cause for why terrorists gained such influence there.
But a country does not fail of its own volition, nor is it weakened by unknown causes.
Twenty years of invasion, civil war, and drought have left Afghanistan's institutions in ruin.
Millions of Afghans huddle in refugee camps or are displaced from their homes.
For these and many other reasons, rebuilding Afghanistan's economy will require not only economic reconstruction but an effort to reinvent the country's political and cultural institutions.
Such a massive effort will be doomed to failure, however, if Afghanistan's neighbors intervene in ways that promote economic upheaval all over again.
Any thought that the anti-terror coalition will be able to bail out fast (as the West did when it abandoned Afghanistan to its fate after the Soviet withdrawal ten years ago) should be forgotten.
Otherwise, it runs the risk of renewed chaos and violence, but this time in a more destabilized region, as Pakistan's current problems demonstrate.
Three problems are of immediate concern, the most important being feeding the Afghan people - both within the country and in refugee camps outside Afghanistan.
Humanitarian aid is being delivered, but a distribution system safe from the predations of Afghanistan's warlords needs to be built.
Indeed, the warlords have been given too big a say in distributing aid already, and it may be hard to strip them of this power.
The second problem involves relocating Afghan refugees now living in Pakistan and Iran, as well as those displaced within Afghanistan.
To achieve this goal, the agricultural economy must be revived in order to revive this industry, providing jobs and food for people.
A massive impediment here is the millions of mines left over from the Soviet invasion that must be removed.
Starving farmers, if unassisted, may return to cultivating a very reliable cash crop: the opium poppy, long a staple of the warlord economy.
Eliminating it will not only help farmers and the West as it tries to curtail heroin use, but also Afghanistan's infant government as it struggles to assert its national authority against the warlords.
A bankrupt warlord, after all, cannot buy weapons or bribe people to maintain their loyalty.
Cities such as Kabul, Mazar, Herat and others will need to be rebuilt as centers of economic and cultural life.
Roads, airports and communications systems must also be revitalized if trade is to be restored.
The educational system needs to be rebuilt almost from scratch, and with so many women anxious to return to teaching, a revived educational system will also help Afghanistan's democratic politicians gain a powerful lobby of workers.
Afghanistan poses particular difficulties in reconstruction, as it is not a society with a strong political center.
Planners should take advantage of the country's decentralized nature and emphasize private sector participation in reconstruction.
A decentralized system will respond better to local needs and avoid an over-bureaucratic public sector.
But autonomous economic regions should be avoided as a threat to Afghan national unity because they would play into the hands of the warlords.
There is the potential for oil and gas exploration, and of mining iron ore and precious metals.
Afghanistan, indeed, must be integrated into the regional pipeline and other development schemes.
Afghans can contribute in a tangible way here by reopening the North-South route connecting the resource rich economies of Central Asia to densely populated India and Pakistan.
None of this will be possible unless Afghanistan's young males are disarmed and given productive work.
Essential here, is to attract expatriate Afghans with skills and professional achievements to help in rebuilding the country by establishing small firms that will suck up the unemployed.
Expatriate involvement will also likely support the rights of women to participate fully and legally in economic and political life, as was the case before 1978.
Finally, donor countries must apply the lessons learned in restoring the war-ravaged states of the former Yugoslavia.
Grants and planning must be coordinated, and the consent of Afghanistan's neighboring countries assured.
An international conference on Afghanistan should be called by the US and held under UN auspices.
It must affirm not only Afghanistan's territorial integrity, but insure that donor commitments meet the scale of the job and that these promises are kept.
PRINCETON – “Do I have to go on my knees?” the International Monetary Fund’s managing director, Christine Lagarde, asked the BBC’s Andrew Marr.
Lagarde was apologizing for the IMF’s poor forecasting of the United Kingdom’s recent economic performance, and, more seriously, for the Fund’s longer-standing criticism of the fiscal austerity pursued by Prime Minister David Cameron’s government.
Now endorsing British austerity, Lagarde said that it had increased confidence in the UK’s economic prospects, thereby spurring the recent recovery.
By issuing it, the IMF compromised on an economic principle that enjoys overwhelming academic support: The confidence “fairy” does not exist.
And, by bowing to the UK’s pressure, the Fund undermined its only real asset – its independence.
The IMF has dodged responsibility for far more serious forecasting errors, including its failure to anticipate every major crisis of the last generation, from Mexico in 1994-1995 to the near-collapse of the global financial system in 2008.
Indeed, in the 6-12 months prior to every crisis, the IMF’s forecasts implied business as usual.
Some claim that the Fund counsels countries in private, lest public warnings trigger the very crisis that is to be avoided.
But, with the possible exception of Thailand in 1997, the IMF’s long-time resident historian, James Boughton, finds little evidence for that view in internal documents.
The IMF’s Internal Evaluation Office is more directly scathing in its assessment of the Fund’s obliviousness to the US subprime crisis as it emerged.
Given that the IMF is the world’s anointed guardian of financial stability, its failure to warn and preempt constitutes a far more grievous lapse than its position on British austerity, with huge costs borne by many, especially the most vulnerable.
For these failures, the Fund has never offered any apology, certainly not in the abject manner of Lagarde’s recent statement.
In a September 2003 speech in Kuala Lumpur, then-Managing Director Horst Köhler conceded that temporary capital controls can provide relief against volatile inflows from the rest of the world.
He was presumably acknowledging that the Fund had it wrong when it criticized Malaysia for imposing such controls at the height of the Asian crisis.
Among the countries hurt by that crisis, Malaysia chose not to ask for the Fund’s help and emerged at least as well as others that did seek IMF assistance.
And even as the Fund opposed them, prominent economists – among them Paul Krugman – endorsed their use.
In his speech, Köhler reported that the Fund had taken the evidence on board and would incorporate it in its future advice.
But in the current crisis, the academic evidence has overwhelmingly shown that fiscal austerity does what textbook economics says it will do: the more severe the austerity, the greater the drag on growth.
A variety of studies confirming this proposition, including one by the IMF’s chief economist, Olivier Blanchard, have withstood considerable scrutiny and leave little room for ambiguity.
The two public voices arguing for the magical properties of austerity are official agencies based in Europe: the OECD and the European Commission.
The Commission’s stance, in particular, is animated by an institutional commitment to a fiscal viewpoint that leaves no room for evidence.
Among the G-7 economies, only Italy has done worse than the UK since the Great Recession began.
Indeed, the UK’s GDP has only just regained its 2008 level, lagging behind even France.
This is all the more remarkable given that the crisis in the UK was comparatively mild.
The fall in property prices was modest relative to Ireland and Spain, and, because there was no construction boom, there was no construction bust.
Having missed the warning signs about the bank Northern Rock, which needed to be bailed out by the UK government after a run on its deposits in September 2007, the British authorities, unlike their eurozone counterparts, quickly dealt with the economy’s distressed banks.
For these reasons, the UK should have had a quick recovery; instead, the Cameron government’s gratuitous austerity stifled it.
Thumbing one’s nose at scholarly evidence is always a bad idea, but it is especially damaging to an institution that relies so heavily on the credibility of its technical competence and neutrality.
If the Fund embraces muddled economics, on what basis will it defend its policy advice?
Moreover, in choosing to flatter the UK’s misguided policy, the Fund has confirmed its deference to its major shareholders.
For years, the view has been that the IMF is a foreign-policy instrument of the United States.
The softness in its annual surveillance of UK economic policy has also been well known.
But in taking this latest step, the Fund has undermined – perhaps fatally – its ability to speak “truth to power.”
If so, a fundamental question may well become unavoidable: Why does the IMF exist, and for whom?
TALLINN – News media nowadays are rife with speculation about whether – if not when – US President Donald Trump and Russian President Vladimir Putin will divide the world between them.
We in Estonia and the other Baltic states now fear being consigned to Russia’s sphere of influence once more.
Indeed, for many Baltic citizens, suppressed visions of torture, deportations, and flight – all experiences from our recent history – are once again bursting into our consciousness.
In the Baltics, we know well the feeling that our country is part of some great global game of money and manipulation.
We haven’t forgotten the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact and the other secret protocols by which Joseph Stalin and Adolf Hitler in 1939 altered the fate of our countries almost overnight.
Just a year later, the Soviet Union’s secret police began arresting and killing our parents and grandparents.
We also have another dark memory of that time: collaboration and appeasement.
Like anyone who has lived through occupation, violent regimes, and brutal wars, we know that trust, so long to develop, can be thrown away in an instant.
In Finland, Estonia, and throughout Europe, we are seeing a deeply worrying trend, with traditional values and principles being compromised by political maneuvering and money.
Sigmund Freud, the father of psychoanalysis, believed that, by improving humans’ inner world, we could improve the outer world we all share.
He argued that culture – all kinds of knowledge that cultivate a social conscience – could be our salvation.
Many of the country’s leading artists, scholars, and doctors, having studied in the capitals of Europe, acted as cultural mediators.
The likes of Mikhail Bulgakov, Marina Tsvetaeva, Alexander Blok, Nikolai Berdyaev, and Wassily Kandinsky were all under Freud’s remedial spell.
The Russian psychoanalyst Tatiana Rosenthal believed she could reconcile Marxism with psychoanalysis.
But the Soviets were soon terrorizing, persecuting, and murdering the people she respected, and destroying Freud’s books, along with tens of millions of others.
Soon, they perverted psychiatry to serve their own interests, using it to “cure” political dissidents.
Once occupation began in 1940, Soviet forces began stripping Estonians of their Western mentality and memory by destroying some 26 million books.
During the major deportations of 1949, as 22,000 people were sent to Siberia, the last personal libraries were burned as well.
In 1941, Max Laosson, an author and editor of an Estonian psychoanalytic magazine, joined a Soviet destruction battalion.
As his former friends’ lives and careers were lost, he rose through the ranks, ultimately becoming a high-ranking Communist functionary.
For Laosson, conformity was a survival strategy; it contributed to the annihilation of culture and trust, but it worked.
In 1939, while living in London, he observed that his theory that people had a basic destructive urge had been proven.
He maintained hope, however, that, while culture could not cure humans of their destructiveness, it could help us to limit these instincts, at least in our shared outer world.
Was Freud – who died before the Nazis began burning people in extermination camps – right to think that we are capable of suppressing humanity’s urge for destruction?
The Finnish author and filmmaker Jörn Donner once wrote that books are incapable of preventing war.
Estonia had regained its independence, and I was seeking a kind of resolution for my mother, who had been taken as a young girl to a gulag.
I believed at that time, and I still do, that culture, as defined by Freud, can save humanity by ensuring that history doesn’t repeat itself.
So I made films and books that would expose the patterns of thought and behavior that underpin the devastating commands to kill and betray one’s neighbor.
Yet some now say that those destructive old networks and narratives are reawakening.
And when powerful forces – ideology, money, envy, or guilt – are activated, there are always those who are willing to betray or censor others.
The banal evil of which Hannah Arendt wrote is still very much alive.
According to the French philosopher Julia Kristeva, cultures die, but they may also kill.
I am not even confident that freedom of speech can be taken for granted anymore.
But, like Freud, I still have hope that – with the help not just of culture, but also of a civil society willing to defend it – we can learn to control our basest urges, and avoid another disastrous division of the world.
BERKELEY – In the circles in which I travel, there is near-universal consensus that America’s monetary authorities made three serious mistakes that contributed to and exacerbated the financial crisis.
This consensus is almost always qualified by declarations that the United States has been well served by its Federal Reserve chairmen since at least Paul Volcker’s tenure, and that those of us who have not sat in that seat know that we would have made worse mistakes.
· the decision was made to eschew principles-based regulation and allow the shadow banking sector to grow with respect to its leverage and its compensation schemes, in the belief that the government’s guarantee of the commercial banking system was enough to keep us out of trouble;
· the Fed and the Treasury decided, once we were in trouble, to nationalize AIG and pay its bills rather than to support its counterparties, which allowed financiers to pretend that their strategies were fundamentally sound;
· the Fed and the Treasury decided to let Lehman Brothers go into uncontrolled bankruptcy in order to try to teach financiers that having an ill-capitalized counterparty was not without risk, and that people should not expect the government to come to their rescue automatically.
There is, however, a lively debate about whether there was a fourth big mistake: Alan Greenspan’s decision in 2001-2004 to push and keep nominal interest rates on US Treasury securities very low in order to try to keep the economy near full employment.
In other words, should Greenspan have kept interest rates higher and triggered a recession in order to avert the growth of a housing bubble?
If we push interest rates up, Greenspan thought, millions of Americans would become unemployed, to no one’s benefit.
If interest rates were allowed to fall, these extra workers would be employed building houses and making things to sell to all the people whose incomes come from the construction sector.
Full employment is better than high unemployment if it can be accomplished without inflation, Greenspan thought.
If a bubble develops, and if the bubble does not deflate but collapses, threatening to cause a depression, the Fed would have the policy tools to short-circuit that chain.
But the question is: was the bet that Greenspan made a favorable one?
Whenever in the future the US finds itself in a situation like 2003, should it try to keep the economy near full employment even at some risk of a developing bubble?
I am genuinely unsure as to which side I come down on in this debate.
Central bankers have long recognized that it is imprudent to lower interest rates in pursuit of full employment if the consequence is an inflationary spiral.
Some days I think that, in the future, central bankers must also recognize that it is imprudent to lower interest rates in pursuit of full employment when doing so risks causing an asset price bubble.
Other days, however, I think that, even with the extra information we have learned about the structure of the economy, Greenspan’s decisions in 2001-2004 were prudent and committed us to a favorable and acceptable bet.
What I do know is that the way the issue is usually posed is wrong.
People claim that Greenspan’s Fed “aggressively pushed interest rates below a natural level.”
In the 1920’s, Swedish economist Knut Wicksell defined it as the interest rate at which, economy-wide, desired investment equals desired savings, implying no upward pressure on consumer prices, resource prices, or wages as aggregate demand outruns supply, and no downward pressure on these prices as supply exceeds demand.
On Wicksell’s definition – the best, and, in fact, the only definition I know of – the market interest rate was, if anything, above the natural interest rate in the early 2000’s: the threat was deflation, not accelerating inflation.
The natural interest rate was low because, as the Fed’s current chairman Ben Bernanke explained at the time, the world had a global savings glut (or, rather, a global investment deficiency).
You can argue that Greenspan’s policies in the early 2000’s were wrong.
But you cannot argue that he aggressively pushed the interest rate below its natural level.
Rather, Greenspan's mistake – if it was a mistake – was his failure to overrule the market and aggressively push the interest rate up above its natural rate, which would have deepened and prolonged the recession that started in 2001.
But today is one of those days when I don’t think that Greenspan’s failure to raise interest rates above the natural rate to generate high unemployment and avert the growth of a mortgage-finance bubble was a mistake.
Creating a computer that "thinks" is one goal of artificial intelligence research.
In 1950, the great British mathematician Alan Turing guessed that "thinking computers" would arrive by 2000.
But computers capable of simulating human thought processes are no closer today than they were then, because we put science before common sense.
Put simply, we failed to notice obvious and important facts about the nature of thought that exist right before our eyes.
Philosophy is intended to show us facts that are so obvious that we might miss them.
Most philosophers, it seems, have been asleep on the job for a long time.
In one, you are thinking about a problem - say, what pension plan you should join - logically and analytically.
In the second, you are thinking casually, drawing on experience rather than analysis.
In the third, you are looking out a window, letting your mind wander.
The single most important fact about thought follows from an obvious observation: these four styles are connected.
We can label them "analysis," "common sense," "free association," and "dreaming."
But the key point is that they are four points on a single continuous spectrum, with analysis at one end and dreaming at the other.
Psychologists and computer scientists like to talk about analysis and common sense as if they were salt and steel, or apples and oranges.
We would do better to think of them as red and yellow, separated not by some sharp boundary, but by a continuous range of red-oranges and orange-yellows.
As your alertness declines, your analytic ability declines - and you rely less on analysis, more on common sense.
(One of experimental psychology's most interesting findings is that people start to dream before they fall asleep, while they are still physiologically awake.)
Free-association and dreaming are blue and violet, with a beautiful spectrum of violet-blues in between.
To understand color, it is not enough to understand red and yellow, or blue and violet.
Likewise, to understand thought, it is not enough to understand "analysis" and "common sense," or "free association" and "dreaming."
It is therefore nonsense to believe that we can simulate thought on a computer without first understanding and simulating all of its component hues.
So, to put the same point another way, no thinking computer is possible until we can build a computer that hallucinates.
To understand the mind, we can conceive of it as being equipped with an imaginary dial marked "mental focus" or "alertness" or "attention."
(I do not know the physiological basis of "mental focus"; physiologists cannot tell me, because most of them also do not know what "mental focus" is.
Some are more comfortable than others thinking analytically, with their dials at "high focus."
(If we understood the physiological basis of mental focus, we would almost certainly have a better understanding about sleep disorders.)
Psychologists tried for generations to understand creativity, which is distinct from analytical thinking.
If you are good at analogies ("that fluttering oak leaf reminds me of a butterfly wing"; "that 17th-century clock is a computer with a round screen"), you have a basis for creative thinking, for approaching old problems in new ways.
Notice the similarity between falling asleep and thinking creatively - no matter how hard you try, you can not force yourself to do either.
Creative thinkers are most productive not when they are concentrating but when they are un -concentrating, when they are thinking not about the problem to be solved but about something else.
So, to think analytically you must set your "focus" to maximum; to think creatively, you must let your focus setting decline - but not so far that you fall asleep.
To complete the picture, we notice that emotion becomes increasingly important as "focus" falls.
Emotions then become "signatures" or "encodings" of complex thoughts.
When two ideas seem unrelated, but make you feel the same way, you have a basis for connecting them - and for inventing a new analogy.
Viewed from this perspective, it appears self-evident that no "thinking computer" whose focus is permanently set on high can come close to simulating human thought.
MOSCOW – Dmitry Medvedev’s election as Russia’s new president was virtually guaranteed.
Whether or not he can improve Russia’s economy after he takes office in May is far less certain.
To be sure, Vladimir Putin’s administration appears to have left Russia’s economy in a rosy state.
Foreign reserves stand at 30% of GDP and are the third highest in the world in absolute terms.
The middle class is buying foreign cars, vacationing abroad, and dining at sushi restaurants, and surveys show that life satisfaction has increased across the board.
The tax reform of 2001 improved incentives to work and decreased tax evasion by introducing a flat 13% income tax – one of the world’s lowest.
Liberalizing the procedures for corporate registration and licensing, and limiting inspections, improved the climate for small businesses and entrepreneurs.
Conservative macroeconomic policy and financial-sector reform lowered interest rates and fueled an investment and consumption boom.
Yet Medvedev’s most notable pre-election speech – unusually liberal even by Western standards – recognized several economic challenges.
Medvedev seems to understand that sustaining growth will not be easy: oil prices cannot rise forever, and the “low hanging fruit” of basic economic reform and prudent macroeconomic policies have already been picked.
According to Medvedev, the only solution is to empower private initiative and innovation.
Despite Russia’s recent economic achievements, both remain at alarmingly high levels.
According to Forbes magazine, there were 87 Russian billionaires, with combined wealth of $471 billion, a figure second only to the United States.
Yet their net worth accounts for roughly 30% of Russia’s GDP, whereas America’s 469 billionaires are worth only about 10% of US GDP.
According to a recent survey, a majority of Russians believes that acquiring wealth requires criminal activity and political connections.
Aside from the relatively small middle class and the even smaller business and intellectual elite, most Russians neither take risks to become entrepreneurs nor favor economic and political liberalization.
According to a recent large survey by the European Bank of Reconstruction and Development, only 36% of Russians support democracy and a mere 28% support market reform, by far the lowest among all transition countries on both counts.
In another World Bank-EBRD survey, 40% of firms in Russia reported making frequent unofficial payments, and roughly the same percentage indicated that corruption is a serious problem in doing business.
Unlike in other emerging markets, corruption has not declined with economic growth; it remains as high as in countries with one-quarter the per capita income of Russia.
One reason for sustained corruption is that Russia’s powerful bureaucracy stands to lose too much from economic liberalization.
Perhaps more importantly, it is hard to fight corruption without political reform, media freedom, and a vibrant civil society.
Remarkably, Medvedev is not wary of speaking about political liberalization.
Indeed, he quotes Catherine the Great: “Freedom is the soul of everything.
He knows that the rule of law is a pre-requisite for sustainable economic growth and promises to build an independent and effective court system.
Unfortunately, as Putin himself recently acknowledged, much of that agenda never materialized.
Implementing Medvedev’s program would benefit both Russia and the West.
This latter point should not be forgotten, because the West’s interests in Russia have grown since Putin was elected: foreign investment is booming, the middle class is hungry for all things Western, and even Russian companies are investing abroad.
Russia is already a large market, and if growth continues, it will be eligible to discuss OECD accession in a few years.
One lever that the West has is to condition membership on political and economic liberalization.
Medvedev appears to understand that such a new burst of liberalization is in Russia’s interest as well.
PARIS – Global policymakers regularly congratulate themselves on having avoided the policy errors of the 1930’s during the financial crisis that began in 2008.
Led by US Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke, an economic historian of the Great Depression, they remembered the ideas of John Maynard Keynes and loosened monetary and fiscal policy to avoid the worst.
We are still coping with the budgetary consequences, especially in Europe, but it is true that the world did not end in 2008.
Monetary tightening was not the only major policy error of the 1930’s; so was a retreat into protectionism, symbolized by the Smoot-Hawley tariff increases at the beginning of that decade.
Historians continue to debate the centrality of the Smoot-Hawley law itself, but the subsequent tariff war certainly damaged trade and economic growth, making a bad situation worse.
Today’s statesmen like to say that they have avoided the protectionist error as well, but is that true?
Certainly I do not expect a tariff war to break out in the near term, but there are dangerous indicators of trade trouble ahead.
The Doha round of global free-trade talks has been abandoned, and the World Trade Organization is now languishing by the lake in Geneva, uncertain of its future.
Perhaps Doha was unlikely to achieve much in the current circumstances, but the absence of any continuing dialogue on world trade – at worst, a useful safety valve – adds a new level of risk.
In the financial arena, there are many signs of a revival of nationalistic approaches to regulation and currency policy.
The crisis challenged the Washington Consensus, which assumed that the world was moving gradually towards free movement of capital and market-determined exchange rates.
Several countries – including Brazil, South Korea, and Turkey – have now imposed capital controls of various kinds.
Even the International Monetary Fund, long the embodiment of the Washington Consensus, has acknowledged that “capital controls are a legitimate part of the toolkit to manage capital flows in certain circumstances.”
American Congressmen view the Chinese as archetypal currency manipulators, but the Swiss have introduced a firm cap on the franc’s appreciation.
These early signs of deglobalization of financial markets have their parallels in commercial banking, with some of the biggest global institutions retrenching rapidly.
Citibank and HSBC had gone further than most in developing a global footprint; indeed, one can hardly get on a plane nowadays without being reminded that the latter is “the world’s local bank.”
The impact is particularly vivid in trade finance, where European banks have been major participants in Asia.
Now they are in rapid retreat from that market, creating a worrying gap that Asian banks are seeking to fill.
As they struggle to raise new capital, European banks and insurers are likely to be forced to sell overseas assets.
If this were simply a sign of a new, tighter focus on viable long-term strategies, it might be regarded it as a benign development.
But there are indications that the process is being driven by regulatory change, and in some cases by regulatory protectionism.
Banks are overseen by a “home” regulator in their country of incorporation, and by a series of “host” regulators where they operate.
“Home” regulators and lenders of last resort are increasingly worried about their potential exposure to losses in banks’ overseas operations.
As Mervyn King, the Governor of the Bank of England, acutely observed, “banks are global in life, but national in death.”
In other words, home authorities are left to pick up the tab when things go wrong.
Host regulators are increasingly nervous about banks that operate in their jurisdictions through branches of their corporate parent, without local capital or a local board of directors.
From the banks’ perspective, that means that capital is trapped in subsidiaries, and cannot be optimally used across its network.
In the single financial market, banks are allowed to take deposits anywhere, without local approval, if they are authorized to do so in one European country.
Yet when the Icelandic banks failed, the British and Dutch authorities had to bail out local depositors.
Now regulators are discouraging such cross-border business, leading to a process with the ugly new name of “de-euroization.”
Regulators, recognizing the risks of allowing financial deglobalization to accelerate, have been seeking better means of handling the failure of huge global banks.
If banks can be wound up easily when things go wrong, with losses equitably distributed, regulators can more easily allow them to continue to operate globally and efficiently.
So a major effort to construct a cross-border resolution framework is under way.
But it is uphill work, and Daniel Tarullo, a governor of the Federal Reserve, has acknowledged that “a clean and comprehensive solution is not in sight.”
Does all of this amount to a serious threat to the benefits of globalization?
Perhaps we are just seeing the beginnings of a changing of the guard, and that HSBC and Citibank will be replaced as global players by China’s ICBC, Brazil’s Itau Unibanco, or Russia’s Sberbank.
But it may be that we are seeing a revival of a less benign Keynesian doctrine: “ideas, knowledge, science....should of their nature be international.
But let goods be homespun wherever it is reasonably and conveniently possible and, above all, let finance be national.”
VIENNA: The formation of a new government coalition in Austria has given rise to international criticism.
However, in studying international media reports, I cannot but notice that Austria has repeatedly been described in a rather undifferentiated and unbalanced way; a way that stands in sharp contradiction to the realities in our country.
Over the last fifty years, Austria has always been a responsible and reliable partner in Europe and the entire international community.
It will continue to live up to her traditional values and responsibilities, based on democracy, the rule of law, respect for human rights, openness, tolerance, humanitarian solidarity, a sense of duty and reliability.
It was signed, on 3 February 2000, in the presence of Federal President Thomas Klestil, by myself and the chairman of the Austrian Freedom Party, Jörg Haider - who remains Governor of Carinthia and did not join the Federal Government.
This document is binding on both of us as signatories, on our respective political parties, and on their democratically elected representatives.
Austria is strongly committed to the principles of liberty, democracy, respect for human rights, and the rule of law that are common to all EU member states.
Significantly, two thirds of the Austrian electorate cast their votes in favor of membership in the European Union in 1994.
This support was considerably higher than in any of the other fourteen member states when they were joining the European Union.
In Austria's view, the Transatlantic Partnership, which has always been characterized by mutual respect and trust, will also have a special significance in ensuring future peace, stability, and prosperity.
Austria takes pride in its international solidarity with the victims of political repression, war, and expulsion.
We opened our doors in 1956 and 1968 during the crises in Hungary and Czechoslovakia, and again in the 1990s when more than 100 000 refugees from the Balkans found a new home in our country.
As a proportion of Austria=s population of about 8 million, the number of Balkan refugees alone would be equivalent to over 1 million refugees in Germany and over 3 million in the United States.
Thus, over the last decades, Austria - more than most other countries - has demonstrated her profound social and humanitarian responsibility.
Austria's past calls for an intensely critical and sensitive approach to injustice, murder, and terror under the Nazi regime.
We have taken important steps to deal with this past, and the new Federal Government will continue on this path without hesitation.
Based on the findings of the interim report of the Austrian Historians' Commission, we will seek prompt compensation for former forced laborers, and we expect the companies concerned also to recognize their responsibilities.
To expedite matters, I have appointed a special representative for the question of forced and slave labor under the Nazi regime.
Mrs. Maria Schaumayer, the former head of the Austrian central bank, will head a new office to handle the issue of compensating the victims.
Among my government=s other commitments, compensation of aging victims of the Holocaust, who live in difficult financial circumstances, will be among our highest priorities in the next few months.
The Austrian Government will also support open access to archives in federal agencies and advocate a similar policy for non-governmental entities.
We will encourage Austrian insurance companies to participate in the work of the International Commission on Holocaust Era Insurance Claims.
We will seek to improve the practical application of the Art Restitution Law of 1998 and encourage similar restitution steps among local and regional governmental bodies.
My Government is deeply committed to the protection of human rights and to combating racism and discrimination.
We have a highly developed national human rights legislation and practice, as well as a strong and independent judiciary.
Austria is party to practically all major international human rights treaties and has traditionally played an active part in their drafting.
We have not only ratified the European Human Rights Convention, we also made it a part of our own Constitution.
This means that anyone residing in Austria can file a complaint to the European Court for Human Rights, whose judgements are binding on the government.
Austria is also constitutionally bound by the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination.
As Federal Chancellor of the Republic of Austria I will do my utmost do ensure the strict implementation of the Preamble and the Government Program (which can be found on the website of the Austrian Federal Government http://www.austria.gv.at.)
I myself and the other members of the Austrian Federal Government expect to be judged according to our performance rather than on the basis of prejudice.
NEW YORK – Internet firms are supposed to be all about the cutting edge, but reality and buzz sometimes conflict.
Consider Groupon: its focus is the power of groups, but its actual business is the old standby of direct-mail marketing and coupons.
But Groupon is spreading that model to a much wider audience – not so much to coupon users, but instead to merchants offering coupons.
In fact, Groupon is doing for e-mail marketing what other Internet companies are doing for the Yellow Pages or classified ads: encouraging merchants to use modern technology to reach their customers.
The model clearly makes sense for a lot of customers: Groupon now has more than 50 million subscribers and aims for 150 million by year-end.
Its revenues – about half the value of total transactions – were an estimated $760 million last year, and should hit $2 billion or more this year.
Unlike most Internet companies, it has a lot of employees relative to its revenues – about 5,000.
Thousands of companies have used Groupon to sell their wares, though Groupon does not disclose its rate of repeat sellers.
In theory, Groupon’s business model is “group coupons”: if enough people sign up, the deal “tips” into action (though now that Groupon is so large, few deals don’t tip).
In practice, Groupon’s original idea – to encourage users to form groups to negotiate with merchants – seems to have disappeared.
The notion of user empowerment has likewise vanished amid intense competition for the direct-to-consumer e-mail marketing business.
While privacy is a big issue in the online consumer business, it is a moot point in the Groupon world, because customers voluntarily and explicitly sign up to be targets (otherwise known as “opt-in”).
While some brave start-ups are trying to create “you-own-your-own-data” businesses, Groupon and its many clones/competitors simply appeal to the consumers’ lust for deals and discounts.
Soon enough, this model is likely to spread – but it is unlikely to be as centralized as search, whether for Groupon or some other competitor: just as users indicate their interests when searching the Internet, they sign up for deals that interest them.
So, you could say that Groupon is opening up e-mail marketing just as Yahoo! opened up search.
Yes, I said that on purpose: there is no guarantee that Groupon will be the long-term winner.
Other players, including Facebook (which can mine a 500-million-plus customer base), could give it strong competition, using newsfeeds or its evolving messaging functions rather than e-mail.
Groupon’s emergence is another step in the Internet’s move toward ever-greater efficiency and transparency.
That is good news for the strong players, but not so good for the weak.
Long ago, the online aggregators Expedia and Travelocity opened up the market.
In response, the leading airlines united to create Orbitz, in an effort to control the distribution of their services to consumers.
Now American Airlines is at war with Orbitz for control of its customers.
Increased transparency has made the airline business more “efficient,” but now airplane seats are hard to sell on any basis other than price.
In an effort to keep their headline prices low, airlines are tacking on surcharges for baggage, drinks, pillows, and other items that once were free.
Thanks to Groupon, merchants may face a similar, but perhaps even more damaging, fate.
They will wait for sales to buy, and merchants will find themselves competing ever more fiercely.
Meanwhile, merchants’ brand power will be eroded as consumers look to Groupon (as they do to Orbitz) rather than to them for the best deals.
The logic is simple: merchants are encouraged to use the deals to attract new customers, who in theory will return at full price.
But, in what seems to be an increasing number of cases, customers come for the deals, and then leave for deals offered by other merchants through Groupon.
So the number of “new” customers attracted by cheap prices increases, and the number of loyal customers decreases as shoppers prefer by become “new” again for whomever offers the best deal.
Over time, merchants are likely to lower the level of their discounts (they can’t afford to do otherwise).
But Groupon and its ilk will continue to offer an effective way for new merchants to enter the market and attract new customers.
Overall, this newly efficient market will be tough on both incumbents and new entrants.
All to the good, most people will say: more consumers get good deals, and bad companies have a tough time staying around or getting established in the first place.
As the market becomes more efficient, Groupon will have to work harder to keep its edge.
Its sales force is training thousands and perhaps millions of merchants to use e-mail marketing and coupons.
In the long run, they will figure out how to do it for themselves, and Groupon and its competitors are likely to offer self-service, just as Google does for search ads.
Merchants may well use intermediaries to reach consumers, but they are unlikely to continue to hand such a huge share of the revenues.
In other words, the market is working faster and faster, and it’s getting harder for anyone to stay ahead for long, whether it’s Groupon’s merchant-customers or Groupon itself.
If it can extend its power to daily deals, its competitors had better watch out!
BERKELEY – However bad you think the global economy is today in terms of the business cycle, that is only one lens through which to view the world.
In terms of global life expectancy, total world wealth, the overall level of technology, growth prospects in emerging economies, and global income distribution, things look rather good, while on still other dimensions – say, global warming or domestic income inequality and its effects on countries’ social solidarity – they look bad.
Even on the business-cycle dimension, conditions have been far worse in the past than they are today.
Consider the Great Depression and the implications of market economies’ inability back then to recover on their own, owing to the burden of long-term unemployment.
But, while we are not at that point today, the Great Depression is no less relevant for us, because it is increasingly likely that long-term unemployment will become a similar impediment to recovery within the next two years.
At its nadir in the winter of 1933, the Great Depression was a form of collective insanity.
Workers were idle because firms would not hire them; firms would not hire them because they saw no market for their output; and there was no market for output because workers had no incomes to spend.
By that point, a great deal of unemployment had become long-term unemployment, which had two consequences.
Because consumer prices fell faster than wages, the welfare of those who remained employed rose in the Great Depression.
Second, reintegrating the unemployed even into a smoothly functioning market economy would prove to be very difficult.
After all, how many employers would not prefer a fresh entrant into the labor force to someone who has been out of work for years?
The simple fact that an economy had recently undergone a period of mass unemployment made it difficult to recover levels of growth and employment that are often attained as a matter of course.
Devalued exchange rates, moderate government budget deficits, and the passage of time all appeared to be equally ineffective remedies.
Highly centralized and unionized labor markets, like Australia’s, did as poorly as decentralized and laissez-faire labor markets, like that of the United States, in dealing with long-term unemployment.
Fascist solutions were equally unsuccessful, as in Italy, unless accompanied by rapid rearmament, as in Germany.
In the end, in the US, it was the approach of World War II and the associated demand for military goods that led private-sector employers to hire the long-term unemployed at wages they would accept.
But, even today, economists can provide no clear explanation of why the private sector could not find ways to employ the long-term unemployed in the near-decade from the winter of 1933 to full war mobilization.
The extent of persistent unemployment, despite different labor-market structures and national institutions, suggests that theories that pinpoint one key failure should be taken with a grain of salt.
At first, the long-term unemployed in the Great Depression searched eagerly and diligently for alternative sources of work.
But, after six months or so passed without successful reemployment, they tended to become discouraged and distraught.
After 12 months of continuous unemployment, the typical unemployed worker still searched for a job, but in a desultory fashion, without much hope.
And, after two years of unemployment, the worker, accurately expecting to be at the end of every hiring queue, had lost hope and, for all practical purposes, left the labor market.
It was also the pattern of the long-term unemployed in Western Europe at the end of the 1980s.
And, in a year or two, it will be the pattern again for the long-term unemployed in the North Atlantic region.
I have been arguing for four years that our business-cycle problems call for more aggressively expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, and that our biggest problems would quickly melt away were such policies to be adopted.
But, over the next two years, barring a sudden and unexpected interruption of current trends, it will become less true.
The current balance of probabilities is that two years from now, the North Atlantic’s principal labor-market failures will not be demand-side market failures that could be easily remedied by more aggressive policies to boost economic activity and employment.
Rather, they will be structural market failures of participation that are not amenable to any straightforward and easily implemented cure.
Emerging changes in the region’s balance-of-power may be of equal long term importance as today’s stock market tumult.
Summit talks between Russia’s president and Japan’s prime minister in early November, for example, produced far richer outcomes than anyone expected.
During long sauna discussions, Boris Yeltsin and Ryutaro Hashimoto agreed to conclude a peace treaty between Russia and Japan by the year 2000, something that has vexed both countries since WWII’s end.
Russia now wants to join the Asian power game by improving it’s ties with Tokyo.
But this can not happen unless the issue of four islands, the Kuriles, taken by Stalin in the waning days of WWII is settled.
In 1956, without closing the issue, the two countries agreed to end their state of war.
Nikita Khrushchev, indeed, promised to return two of the four islands if and when a peace treaty was signed.
In 1991, as the Cold War wound down, President Gorbachev conceded that there was a territorial problem between the two countries and hinted at a willingness to resolve the matter.
By 1993, however, President Yeltsin was talking tougher: "Let this be settled in the next century, by future generations," he argued in a speech before Oryol University students.
Impasse keeps the two countries at a distance, one side-effect being the relatively low Japanese investment in postcommunist Russia.
Now President Yeltsin seems to have accelerated his timetable by his promises to Hashimoto in Krasnoyarsk.
Some speculate that Yeltsin would like to go down in history as the man who solved Russia’s most troublesome territorial dispute.
Perhaps he also believes that Russia’s Far East cannot be developed without Japanese capital and technology.
Such growth is needed east of Irkutsk (where the population is only eight million) because, otherwise, the area may fall into China’s sphere of influence.
Indeed, next door, China’s "Northeast District" (formerly Manchuria) has about 100 million people.
Many Chinese, indeed, have taken advantage of warmer Sino/Russian relations to cross the border into Russia and set up and settle down as traders.
Premier Hashimoto went some way to allaying Russian fears here by promising to assist in improving Siberian railways and other transport systems.
Hashimoto also proposed an increased level of security cooperation, including the exchange of visits between the Chairman of the Japanese Joint Staff Council and the Russian Joint Chief of Staff.
Some form of joint military exercises, something which Japan and China have not yet contemplated, were also broached.
The shifts in Yeltsin’s attitude must be seen in the context of Nato’s forthcoming expansion, and the closer security ties between America and Japan forged since April 1996.
Both events pushed Yeltsin into his so-called "strategic partnership" with China, with both partners sharing distrust of America acting the dominant hegemon.
But Yeltsin must suspect that Russia’s Pacific role would be handicapped so long as it remained tied with a China on bad terms with America.
Good relations for Tokyo are not just beneficial for developing Siberia, but may lead to membership in Apec (Asia-Pacific Economic forum) .
Apec’s original intent was to promote economic cooperation and trade liberalization in the region.
Since 1993, however, it has become an occasion for informal multilateral and bilateral summits among the heads of government of some 20 member states.
(The recent Vancouver summit discussions on the region’s financial crisis are a case in point.)
By somehow reaching agreement on the territorial dispute between Japan and Russia, Yeltsin will move toward developing a strategic partnership with Japan.
In order not to slight the Chinese, a week after his meetings with Hashimoto, Yeltsin flew to Beijing to stage, however awkwardly, an embrace with President Jiang Zemin, who had also just come back from his trip to the United States.
The Yeltsin/Jian summit was paralled by a visit to Tokyo by Russia’s foreign minister Primakov.
The diplomatic dance continued soon after, with China’s premier Li Peng arriving in Tokyo.
What is afoot now is the most intense interaction among the region’s four powers anyone has seen in decades.
The old US/China/Japan triangle may be on the way out if Moscow’s ties with Tokyo improve.
The irony is that it seems to have taken a push from the West – ie, Nato expansion – to concentrate the Kremlin’s mind on the East.
NEW YORK – Continued discrimination against Roma in Europe not only violates human dignity, but is a major social problem crippling the development of Eastern European countries with large Roma populations.
Spain, which has been more successful in dealing with its Roma problem than other countries, can take the lead this month as it assumes the European Union presidency.
Despite the region’s overall economic growth over the past two decades, life for many Roma is worse now than ever.
But the heavy industries in which many were employed have now closed, and unemployment is widespread.
The majority population is very hostile towards Roma, and discrimination against them occurs at every level.
For example, Roma children are often automatically put into classes for the mentally disabled, simply because they are Roma.
Despite court rulings ordering reform, Roma are regularly denied equal access to housing, education, and healthcare, creating a vicious cycle of poverty and marginalization.
The EU is slowly realizing that it has a major social problem on its hands.
Denied opportunities in the East, many Roma have moved to Western Europe, fueling a new wave of hostility.
In Italy, the Berlusconi government’s treatment of Roma settlements – destroying homes and fingerprinting Roma based solely on their ethnicity – blatantly violated human rights.
This prompted the EU to create the new position of Fundamental Rights Commissioner, with confirmation hearings set to begin in January;
On a positive note, the Decade of Roma Inclusion, established in 2005, is receiving strong support from the structural funds administered by the European Commission and is making some inroads.
Yet this is not enough to reverse a rising tide of violence and discrimination, compounded by the recent economic recession.
What is needed now is a comprehensive European strategy to address Roma issues across borders.
This strategy must address both intolerable living conditions for Roma and the hostile stereotypes that prevail within majority populations, because they mutually reinforce each other.
Following current demographic trends, by 2040, Roma will comprise roughly 40% of Hungary’s working-age population.
Unless the Roma are well educated and socially integrated – in stark contrast to today’s reality – these countries’ economic future is bleak.
The key to success is the education of a new generation of Roma who do not seek to assimilate into the general population, but deliberately retain their identity as Roma.
Educated, successful Roma will shatter the prevailing negative stereotypes by their very existence.
My foundation network has made the education of Roma a priority since its inception in Hungary in 1984, and across the rest of Eastern Europe since 1989.
These efforts have produced a small, well-educated Roma elite who are now making an important contribution to the emancipation of Roma.
These leaders have blazed a trail for future advocates, but there are far too few of them.
In conjunction with the launch of the Decade of Roma Inclusion in 2005, my foundation network formed an alliance with the World Bank and transferred its Roma educational programs to a newly established Roma Education Fund.
Last year, the Fund directly assisted 30,000 Roma children and 800 university students.
It also provided invaluable support to member countries’ public education systems to strengthen Roma inclusion.
The Fund plans to double its activities in the next five years, but, again, this is not enough.
The scale of this challenge demands a comprehensive, institutional response from the EU that goes well beyond the Decade and the capacity of my foundations.
While the European Roma Platform launched in 2009 paid lip service to Roma issues, it did not go far enough.
Europe must develop a long-term strategy tied to programs and monitoring mechanisms that will deliver real change on the ground.
Spain can be justly proud of the way it has dealt with its own Roma minority.
I hope that the Spanish EU Presidency will build on this experience to champion the launch of a comprehensive European Roma strategy.
If Spain leads the way, all of Europe will ultimately reap the benefits.
LAS VEGAS – Las Vegas seems to be an apt place to launch a risky corporate gamble that could destroy the livelihoods of millions of small-scale farmers.
Earlier this month, the international food conglomerate Cargill chose the city’s famous Strip to introduce what it hopes will be its next blockbuster product: EverSweet, a sweetener made of “the same sweet components in the stevia plant.”
And yet, despite Cargill’s heavy reliance on stevia in its promotional material, EverSweet does not contain a single leaf of the plant.
Cargill’s new product is an example of synthetic biology, a form of genetic engineering that uses modified organisms to manufacture compounds that would never be produced naturally.
What makes EverSweet taste sweet is not stevia; it is a compound produced by a bioengineered yeast.
Synthetic biology is high-tech, and it is also potentially high-risk.
Even as it attracts billions of dollars in investment, it is the subject of growing international concern.
Tellingly, Cargill does not advertise its use of the controversial technology; instead, the company describes EverSweet as the product of “specially crafted baker’s yeast,” as if it were a recipe brewed for centuries in Bavarian villages.
Discerning the risks that may be posed by food ingredients made from this kind of genetic engineering – different from those known from other types of transgenic foods – is still at an early stage.
In a recent opinion, European Union scientific committees concluded that while the risk assessment used for evaluating genetically modified organisms should be applicable to aspects of synthetic biology, in specific cases new approaches may be needed to evaluate the safety of the technology.
And yet there is one area in which the dangers are already apparent: the economic damage that will be caused as lab-grown compounds replace field-grown stevia.
The Guarani indigenous people of Paraguay have grown and used the herb for centuries.
More recently, it has become a food-industry craze, driven in part by fear of obesity lawsuits.
As major brands like Coke and Pepsi aggressively market stevia-sweetened cola drinks as natural and healthy, the agricultural acreage of the plant has exploded.
Analysts expect the stevia market to reach $275 million by 2017.
The global leaders in stevia production are Paraguay, China, and the United States, with Kenya close behind.
Early in 2015, Marian Bassey (representing the ETC Group) met stevia farmers in Kenya to understand what competition from synthetic biology might mean for them.
For Ann Nduta Kanini, a widowed mother of eight, selling stevia has allowed her to send her children to school and put food on the table.
When we asked Paul Mwangi Kigaa, another small-scale farmer, what Cargill’s use of synthetic biology would mean for him and his neighbors, he answered that “growing stevia in their factories will affect our lives!”
Moreover, poor farmers have been actively encouraged to invest in stevia, because its cultivation can help preserve fragile and unique ecosystems.
In its annual survey of leading global risks, the World Economic Forum noted that, “the invention of cheap, synthetic alternatives to high-value agricultural exports … could suddenly destabilize vulnerable economies by removing a source of income on which farmers rely.”
Ingredients that are being replaced or are likely to be exchanged for products made through synthetic biology include vanilla, saffron, coconut oil, patchouli, olive squalene, and rose oil.
Indeed, the world’s largest cosmetics, flavor, and fragrance companies are hoping that synthetic biology will help them replace more than 200 natural botanical extracts.
According to the International Federation of Essential Oils and Aroma Trades (IFEAT), around 95% of these botanical products are produced by small-scale farmers, bringing much-needed cash income to some of the world’s poorest communities.
Fortunately, consumers are becoming increasingly aware of the risks posed by synthetic biology, and companies are responding.
Earlier this year, the iconic ice cream brand Ben and Jerry’s pledged not to use any ingredients produced through synthetic biology.
Similarly, Häagen-Dazs confirmed that it will not use vanilla flavor produced through synthetic biology in its ice cream.
And, after the natural cleaning products brand Ecover was petitioned by tens of thousands of angry consumers, the company quickly rolled back an experiment in which it used algal oil produced through synthetic biology in a laundry detergent.
The Non-GMO Project, an increasingly influential labeling organization, has ruled that the 33,000 products carrying its seal must not use synthetic biology.
Meanwhile, the European Stevia Association (EUSTAS), has expressed concern that EverSweet will undermine stevia’s reputation as safe and natural.
The dark clouds gathering around synthetic biology may not have been visible at Cargill’s sunny product launch.
But, by competing with poor farmers and misleading consumers about the origins of its ingredients, EverSweet and other examples of synthetic biology are generating bitterness at both ends of the product chain.
CHICAGO: NATO's stated reason for bombing Yugoslavia is to enforce international law prohibitions on war crimes, crimes against humanity, and perhaps even genocide.
Secretary of State Madeleine Albright maintains that NATO is bombing "to uphold the law."
The U.S. Senate is pressuring President Clinton to ensure that the war crimes tribunal in The Hague indicts Slobodan Milosevic.
David Scheffer, the U.S. Ambassador for War Crimes, proclaims NATO's unprecedented enforcement of human rights to be a "watershed" for international law.
The problem with these legalistic arguments is that NATO itself is flouting international law.
The NATO operation shows how the efficacy of international human rights law depends on its selective application.
NATO is violating international law in order to uphold it, and NATO would not be upholding international law if it were subject to it.
In large part out of concern for human rights, the Charter prohibits one nation's use of force against another unless the Security Council authorizes the attack or unless the attack is a self-defensive response to armed aggression across recognized borders.
The illegality of NATO's attack, combined with NATO's destruction of civilian targets, might also constitute war crimes.
Yugoslavia is pressing many of these legal claims before the International Court of Justice.
In addition, as the UN's chief human rights officer recently noted, NATO's possible war crimes fall within the jurisdiction of the same war crimes tribunal that might indict Mr. Milosevic.
NATO and U.S. officials who rail against the illegality of Yugoslavia's atrocities in Kosovo scoff at claims that NATO's bombing might violate international law.
These officials confuse the motive for NATO's actions with the legality of such actions.
NATO's intervention was motivated in part by humanitarian concerns, and in part by the need to resolve a crisis of credibility and purpose.
But NATO' s motives, benign or not, are no defense to illegality.
None of this is to suggest that NATO's illegal acts will be remedied by the institutions of international law.
The war crimes tribunal in The Hague, established and dominated by western countries, will never indict, much less convict, a NATO official.
And no country is likely to bomb a NATO country to redress NATO violations of international law in the Balkans.
In short, NATO is immune from the very international laws it purports to enforce.
NATO's opportunistic invocation of international human rights law is but one example of the broader double standard that characterizes this law.
No nation on earth more aggressively enforces international human rights law against other countries.
And no nation on earth more aggressively resists the application of international human rights law to itself.
The United States stands nearly alone in refusing to join the Land Mine Treaty, the Rights of the Child Convention, or the International Criminal Court.
When it does ratify human rights treaties, it renders them inapplicable to U.S. officials.
And though the United States invokes international human rights institutions when doing so suits its purposes, it renounces these institutions when they attempt to assert jurisdiction over the United States.
The U.S. provides extraordinary (though imperfect) human rights protections within its borders in virtue of its domestic legal system.
So its failure to apply international human rights law in its domestic sphere makes little practical difference to the rights available there.
The United States resists application of human rights law to its activities abroad because it has unique human rights enforcement obligations, and thus potential exposure to the strictures of human rights law.
That said, the United States' opportunistic use of human rights law rhetoric -- on full display in the Balkans conflict -- still seems hypocritical.
The double standard that underlies this hypocrisy, however, is an inevitable feature of international human rights law.
International law is often criticized as toothless because it lacks a dependable centralized enforcement mechanism.
Some aspects of international law -- for example, principles of diplomatic immunity, or international communications standards -- have little need for such a sanctioning authority.
If one nation -- say, Yugoslavia -- is otherwise inclined to abuse its citizens, it will perceive no reciprocal benefit from compliance with an international norm that requires greater respect for human rights.
A nation like Yugoslavia is unlikely to comply with international human rights law unless other nations -- say, NATO -- sanction non-compliance.
It is also why the rare enforcement of human rights law that we do see tends to conform to the enforcing nation's political interests.
For example, the U.S. government intervenes in Haiti to avoid a flood of refugees and imposes sanctions on Cuba because of domestic political benefits.
But it does not sanction Turkey or China for their human rights abuses, because such sanctions are strategically too costly.
International human rights law thus depends on powerful nations for enforcement, which in turn means that powerful nations are not subject to this law when they violate it.
Whether the illegality of human rights enforcement actions ultimately matters will depend on the success of these actions.
At this point, it is far from obvious that the humanitarian benefits of NATO's intervention will outweigh the costs of the intervention -- costs measured in lives lost as a result of NATO acts and in the larger danger that the intervention poses to international order.
SEOUL – Asian countries have been watching the Greek crisis unfold with a mixture of envy and schadenfreude.
When they experienced their own financial crisis in 1997, they received far less aid, with far harsher conditions.
But they also recovered much more strongly, suggesting that ever-growing bailouts may not be the best prescription for recovery.
Since the onset of the crisis, Greece has received massive financing from the so-called “troika”: the European Commission, the European Central Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
It received bailout packages in 2010 and 2012 totaling €240 billion ($266 billion), including €30 billion from the IMF, more than triple Greece’s cumulative limit for IMF borrowing.
By contrast, South Korea’s 1997 bailout package – which was larger than those received by Indonesia, Thailand, or the Philippines – totaled $57 billion, with $21 billion coming from the IMF.
At the time, South Korea’s annual GDP was $560 billion; in 2014, Greek GDP amounted to less than $240 billion.
For starters, at the onset of the crisis, then-IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn was a leading candidate to become President of France.
More generally, major IMF shareholders, the European Union, and the United States have a vital interest in stabilizing Greece to safeguard French and German banks and preserve NATO unity.
Desmon Lachman, a former deputy director of the IMF’s policy department, has called the institution a slush fund, abused by its political masters during the Greek crisis.
To be sure, the economic mess created in Greece – the result of government profligacy, official corruption, and widespread tax evasion – merited some international assistance.
And the IMF did impose conditions on its loans to Greece – including fiscal austerity, privatization, and structural reform of its pension and tax systems – most of which were necessary to address the country’s insolvency.
The requirements of the latest rescue deal are the toughest yet – even tougher than those that Greek voters overwhelmingly rejected in a referendum earlier this month.
But the scale of the aid remains massive, especially when one considers how little progress Greece has made in implementing the reforms it promised in the past.
Unlike Greece, Asia’s problem was not an insolvency crisis, but a liquidity crisis, caused by a sudden reversal of capital flows.
In South Korea, net private-capital inflows of 4.8% of GDP in 1996 swung to net outflows of 3.4% of GDP in 1997.
Though the accumulation of substantial short-term debts in the financial system and corporate sector did amplify the shocks, the primary factors fueling the crisis were the lack of international liquidity, panicked behavior by investors, and financial contagion.
Yet the IMF imposed even tougher conditions on Asia than it has on Greece, including fiscal austerity, monetary tightening, and financial restructuring.
Some of these requirements were clearly unnecessary, as evidenced by Malaysia, which recovered quickly from the crisis without IMF assistance.
Once confidence began to recover and market conditions stabilized, the East Asian economies shifted their monetary and fiscal policies toward expansion and embraced large-scale exchange-rate depreciation – efforts that enhanced their export competitiveness.
Structural reforms, including the immediate closing of financial institutions and the elimination of non-performing loans, also helped to bolster recovery.
In South Korea, for example, real GDP growth quickly rebounded from -6.7% in 1998 to 9.5% in 1999.
By mid-2003, some 776 of the country’s financial institutions were closed.
And the authorities’ strong commitment to reform restored investor confidence, reviving inflows of private capital and reactivating foreign trade.
Instead of dropping to 110% as planned, the public debt-to-GDP ratio has increased to 170%.
Annual per capita real income contracted 4.8%, on average, over the last six years.
Unemployment stands at 26%, and hovers around 50% among young people.
Against this background, it was not shocking that Greece, unable to come up with €1.5 billion at the end of June, became the first developed country to miss a payment to the IMF.
Belatedly, the Fund acknowledged that its lending and policy advice had failed in Greece.
Greece’s government then demanded more financial support with less stringent conditions.
But, as its creditors have now recognized, providing more money will not address Greece’s insolvency.
That is why the new deal requires that the government immediately cut pensions, hike taxes (beginning with the value-added tax), liberalize the labor market, and adhere to severe spending constraints.
At the same time, a write-down of official debt, like the “haircut” given to private creditors in 2012, will be necessary.
Many have questioned whether agonizing reforms are entirely necessary; if the country returned to the drachma, they suggest, it could implement interest-rate cuts and devalue its exchange rate, thereby engineering an export-led recovery.
But, given Greece’s small export sector, not to mention the weakness of the global economy, such a recovery may be impossible.
So far, Greece has shown itself to be unwilling to implement a painful internal-wage adjustment and reform measures forced by outsiders.
Perhaps the latest deal, which was reached with Greece on the brink, will prove to be a turning point, with Greece finally committing actively to economic and fiscal reform.
Otherwise, Greece’s exit from the eurozone – with all the concomitant social and economic strife – seems all but inevitable.
Asians watch with sympathy the fall from grace of the birthplace of Western civilization.
But perhaps Greece should look to Asia for proof that, by taking responsibility for its own destiny, a country can emerge stronger from even the most difficult trials.
In his gushing account of President George W. Bush, the former presidential speechwriter David Frum tells us that his boss "scorned the petty untruths of the politician."
We learn, for example, that when asked to prepare a radio broadcast for the following day, he would begin reading, "Today I am in California" and quickly break off, saying with exasperation, "But I'm not in California."
Frum thought this a bit pedantic, but concluded that it was emblematic of the President's character and that "the country could trust the Bush administration not to cheat and not to lie."
Bush may naively consider it lying, and therefore wrong, to say that he is in California when he is recording a speech in Washington.
But he fails to see anything gravely wrong about misleading his country and the world concerning Iraq's weapons of mass destruction.
As we have seen, the White House built its case for war on a highly selective dossier of evidence, and Bush made statements about Iraq's attempt to purchase uranium from Africa that he and his staff knew to be highly doubtful, if not false.
When questions were raised about how the statement about uranium was allowed to remain in Bush's State of the Union address, both National Security Advisor Condoleeza Rice and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld argued that it was not a lie.
Their reasoning indicates that they, like the President, have a childishly literal notion of what it is to lie.
Bush's actual words were these: "The British government has learned that Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa."
Bush's statement took this form because the CIA objected to the original version, which flatly stated that Saddam Hussein had sought to buy uranium from Africa.
The White House staff member who discussed it with the CIA then suggested changing the sentence so that it stated that the British reported that Saddam Hussein had sought to buy uranium from Africa.
It was nevertheless misleading, for the CIA had informed the British that their information was not reliable.
The fact that Bush only referred to a British statement is the basis for Rice and Rumsfeld's defense of it.
Rice said that "the statement that [Bush] made was indeed accurate.
In fact, even on the most literal interpretation, Bush's statement was not accurate.
Bush did not say merely that the British had "reported" that Iraq had sought to buy uranium from Africa, but that the British had ``learned'' this.
To say that someone has learned something is to endorse what they say they have learned as true.
Imagine that the British had said that Saddam Hussein was a peace-loving man about to bring democracy to his country.
Quite apart from these weak attempts to justify Bush's statement as "technically accurate," the more serious charge is that even if what Bush said really were technically accurate, it still would have been designed to mislead the world into thinking that Iraq had been trying to buy uranium in Africa.
Bush and his staff had good reason to believe that this was not true.
Bush's response to the issue after it became public shows him to be focused on the trivial and morally reckless about the essential.
A person who is morally sensitive to the seriousness of starting a war on the basis of misleading information would take appropriate steps.
He would ensure that the American public knew how the error occurred, and that whoever was responsible for it suffered the usual consequences that befall senior officials who make what was--to put the best possible interpretation on it--a grave error of judgment.
When the issue became public, Bush's response was to condemn his critics as "revisionist historians" and to evade questions about the credibility of the information he had provided by asserting that the removal of Saddam was a good outcome.
Then he said that the CIA had cleared his speech, as if that absolved him of all responsibility.
After CIA Director George Tenet took responsibility for the inclusion of the misleading material, Bush said that he "absolutely" had confidence in Tenet and the CIA, and that he considered the matter closed.
Belief in Bush's honesty led many voters to prefer him to Albert Gore in the 2000 presidential election.
Among voters who rated "honesty" as an important factor influencing their choice of candidate, 80% said that they voted for Bush.
These voters were disgusted with Clinton, not only for his sexual relationship with White House intern Monica Lewinsky, but for lying about it.
That Clinton did lie about his sexual activities is clear, and he was wrong to do so.
But his lies did not lead his country into a war that has cost thousands of lives.
Bush's excessively literal interpretation of the requirements of honesty conceals a deeper dishonesty whose consequences have been far more morally serious.
HONOLULU – My three-year-old niece believes strongly in the power of “the good guys.”
Whenever I visit, she drags me to the bookshelf in her room and pulls out book after book, each with the same conclusion: in battles big or small, the good guys always win.
I don’t have the heart to tell her that, in the real world, clean fights and gratifying outcomes are the exception.
Modern warfare follows no rules, and loyalties are never black and white.
For me, nothing illustrates this truth more terribly than the surge in violence directed at schools and educators in conflict areas.
In May of this year, the Global Coalition to Protect Education from Attack will publish its “Education Under Attack” report, which confirms that wars and military engagements are affecting education more severely than any time in recent memory.
Around the world, some 80 million children are unable to attend school because of violence.
In the first half of 2017, there were more than 500 attacks on schools in 20 countries, a significant increase from previous years.
According to the United Nations, in 15 of those countries, government soldiers or rebel forces seized schools for military use.
For obvious reasons, governments that support the targeting of schools and educators in any capacity must be held to account.
Children forced to live in conflict zones are already suffering; when violence prevents them from learning, they suffer a double tragedy.
Before the current conflict in Syria, for example, the enrollment rate for primary school was above 90%.
Today, in areas most affected by the fighting, it has dropped to below 30%.
In Yemen, with war and famine raging, more than two million children between the ages of six and nine are out of school.
And nearly half of the 700 UN-administered schools in Syria, Gaza, the West Bank, Lebanon, and Jordan have been attacked or shut down at least once in recent years.
Humanitarian crises often produce a surge in political will; the needless suffering of others, and especially of children, pushes the international community to dedicate money and energy to ameliorating the misery.
Unfortunately, that generosity rarely extends to supporting education in war-torn areas.
Of the millions of children not attending school around the world, one in four lives in a crisis-affected country.
Yet, education accounts for just 2% of total humanitarian aid, while only 38% of emergency aid requests for education are met.
In April 2000, when the Dakar Framework for Action was adopted, signatories identified conflict as a “major barrier” to attaining the goal of “education for all,” one of the UN Sustainable Development Goals.
The report also expressed the consensus view that governments and civil-society groups must move swiftly to “reconstruct destroyed or damaged education systems” whenever possible.
Why, then, nearly two decades after the framework was signed, is this commitment to rebuilding routinely ignored?
Each year of additional schooling increases a learner’s earnings by 10%, on average, improving their long-term financial stability, and helping to lower the risk of a return to violence.
In other words, as I explained at a recent panel organized by the Education Above All Foundation at the World Innovation Summit for Education (WISE), attacks on education are quite literally attacks on our collective future.
Girls are are 2.5 times more likely than boys to be out of school in conflict-affected areas.
Yet investing in girls has long-term benefits that can transform communities and eradicate poverty.
Educated girls are less likely to marry at a young age, and more likely to have fewer, healthier children.
Moreover, women in the workforce reinvest 90% of their incomes to their communities.
Countries enduring and emerging from violence may not have the financial capacity to rebuild schools while simultaneously funding reconstruction.
The global community must find the $2.3 billion needed to improve access to education in conflict zones.
At the same time, donors must fund institutions that will help children traumatized by the psychological stress of war.
For many children in conflict areas, psychosocial and emotional support is as important as educational opportunity.
The world of my niece’s picture books – where every struggle in summarized in 20 pages and ends with a “happily ever after” – will never be reality.
But, in the absence of fairy godmothers and protective witches, the world needs workable solutions that can help the good guys (and girls) win.
By educating every child, even those in harm’s way, we may succeed in making the world just a little less wicked.
PARIS – The topics chosen by the European Central Bank for its annual forum in Sintra, Portugal, at the end of May were not deflation, quantitative easing, or financial stability.
ECB President Mario Draghi explained why in his introductory speech: The eurozone lacks both growth momentum and resilience to adverse shocks.
The European Commission now expects growth in the eurozone to reach 1.5% in 2015 and 1.9% in 2016.
That certainly looks good in comparison to the near-stagnation of recent years.
But, given the combination of massive monetary support, a now-neutral fiscal stance, a steep fall in oil prices, and a depreciated euro, it is the least we could expect, and it will bring per capita GDP back only to its 2008 level.
The fact that leaders and pundits are hailing this brighter outlook indicates just how diminished our expectations have become.
Until recently, fiscal austerity and the euro crisis could be blamed for poor economic performance.
Although growth may exceed the Commission’s forecast, there are reasons to be concerned about the eurozone’s growth potential.
In order to strengthen that potential, central bankers can only advocate economic reforms; it is governments that are responsible for adopting them.
After all, central banks are quick to rebut monetary-policy suggestions from governments in the name of independence.
Draghi has good reason to insist that, in the absence of significant national action, the eurozone might well stumble from crisis to crisis until its very viability is jeopardized.
Participation in a monetary union is a demanding endeavor that requires policy agility among its participating countries, as well as a sense of common purpose.
But governments have good reason to argue that, as far as reforms are concerned, policymaking requires precision and political realism, which outside advice often lacks.
A natural solution could be for the ECB to rely on the other European institutions.
Since 2010, the EU has been piling up coordination procedures in the hope of pushing governments into enacting politically difficult reforms.
Each year, every member country is handed a to-do list of public spending, labor-market, and competition reforms, as well as other recommendations.
The European Commission is also trying to lure reluctant governments into bolder action by offering them more fiscal room.
And, two years ago, German Chancellor Angela Merkel floated the idea of individually tailored “reform contracts” that, again, would create incentives for governments to enact pro-growth reforms.
But the effectiveness of these initiatives has proved to be limited, to say the least.
Schemes aimed at strengthening policy coordination have merely added complexity to an already Byzantine architecture of procedures.
Recommendations issued to individual countries lack both traction in national capitals and coherence at the eurozone level.
The EU has a strong hand when a country is in need of financial assistance, but otherwise it can do little more than offer counsel.
The eurozone must overcome this shortcoming, but no simple solution is at hand.
There is broad agreement that streamlining is required; but that will not suffice.
Some advocate further centralization of decisions; but that will not help, either, because reforms are intrinsically national, if not sub-national.
First, the ECB’s analysis of the economic challenges facing the eurozone should be very transparent.
Governments should know precisely how Draghi and his colleagues assess the potential for growth and employment and how this will affect monetary policy.
They should have a clear idea of what they can expect from the ECB and what outcome (rather than precise measures) the ECB expects from them.
Second, the EU should support the creation of national institutions to monitor domestic developments and their compatibility with overall eurozone goals.
These could be modeled on the fiscal councils that were created a few years ago in each member country to assess national governments’ public-finance plans.
Because they are part of the national conversation, these councils have proved to be a useful addition.
In the same way, competitiveness councils could monitor the evolution of wages and prices, employment and growth, and the current account, and provide recommendations to national governments and social partners.
Such institutions would be much better placed than the EU to formulate timely and granular reform recommendations.
They could operate as a network, rely on similar methodologies, and thus help ensure more consistency among individual policies.
Third, the EU could foster aggregate action in high-priority areas by implementing schemes to support individual citizens, companies or public entities, access to which would be conditional on national policies fulfilling minimal requirements.
For example, the EU could create a training support scheme for unemployed young people, but make it contingent on the elimination of national policies that hinder youth employment.
Or it could create a scheme to support higher education, but reserve it for universities in countries where educational institutions have been granted a minimum degree of autonomy.
The justification would be that EU money can help only in the context of supportive national policies in the same field.
Conditionality of this sort would be positive, local, and non-punitive; it would serve as a carrot, not a stick.
These are modest proposals, because, when it comes to pro-growth reform in Europe, there is no magic bullet.
But the measures recommended here would serve to build a more decentralized, incentive-based policy regime.
WASHINGTON, DC – North Koreans relish the element of surprise when they get to choose the stage and command the theatrics.
The unexpected visit of three top leaders of the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) to the closing ceremony of the Asian Games in Incheon last week, stole the show from the athletes.
The three visitors – Hwang Pyong-so, Vice Chairman of the powerful National Defense Commission, and two other senior officials from the Workers’ Party of Korea, Choe Ryong-hae and Kim Yang-gon – met with the South Korean prime minister, national security adviser to the president, and the head of the Ministry of Unification.
It was a rather merry occasion, with leaders on both sides promising to meet again next month and offering abundant smiles and handshakes for the cameras.
Korea observers are wondering what this means for the future of the inter-Korean relationship.
Is the government in Pyongyang trying to send a message to South Korea, the United States, and China?
Will the six-party talks on North Korea’s nuclear program, which have been defunct since 2009, resume?
In recent months, North Korea has been exploring new diplomatic territory, with high-level officials engaging Europe, Japan, and the United Nations General Assembly in New York.
Last week, the DPRK mission to the UN even responded to a highly critical human rights report by acknowledging its labor camps (which it defended as a means of “re-education” and “reform”).
It remains to be seen whether it seeks to engage the rest of the world in a constructive and sustained manner, or whether DPRK officials and diplomats are merely putting a good face forward to divert international attention from their country’s reputation as a nuclear weapons-monger and human-rights violator.
Two days before the North Korean delegation arrived, the Committee for the Peaceful Reunification of Korea (CPRK), which is officially part of the Korean Workers Party, denounced the “South Korean puppet forces for seriously violating the North-South joint declarations and pushing North-South ties into the worst catastrophe.”
On the day of the Incheon visit, North Korea’s state news agency continued the bellicose and derogatory language toward South Korea and the US: “Lurking behind this is an ulterior design of the US to [prod more] zealously the South Korean puppet forces into escalating the confrontation with the DPRK in a bid to strain the situation to an extreme pitch and ignite [a] second Korean War.”
And a mere two days before the Incheon visit, the DPRK ambassador to the United Nations said that China, Russia, and North Korea stand ready to restart the six-party talks.
In fact, there is no coordinated action among the three countries; indeed, relations between China and North Korea remain frigid.
Rather, North Korea seems to be posing a non-existent united front in order to put pressure on the US to soften its stance toward the DPRK regarding its nuclear program and human-rights record, and to reconsider economic sanctions against the North.
Seen in this light, the visit to Incheon was a way to persuade Seoul to put pressure on the US to play nice.
Adding to the mixed messages is the symbolic date of October 4, the seventh anniversary of the 2007 declaration on inter-Korean cooperation signed by the late South Korean president Roh Moo-hyun and the late North Korean leader Kim Jong-il.
This could be a positive reminder that the DPRK is seeking to pursue some of the agreements contained in that declaration.
On the other hand, the North could be taking advantage of criticism of South Korean President Park Geun-hye by her opponents on the left for failing to include the October 4 agreement in her five-year plan regarding inter-Korean relations.
Complicating matters further, military theatrics resumed just two days after the friendly visit to Incheon, when a boat from the DPRK crossed the disputed Northern Limit Line (NLL) in the Yellow Sea, inciting a ten-minute firefight with South Korean forces.
The North may have wanted to emphasize that its friendliness toward the South should not be interpreted as weakness.
Or perhaps it was attempting to determine whether its overtures had led South Korea to soften its stance toward the DPRK.
(South Korea’s response – 94 machine-gun rounds – was unambiguous.)
In any case, the incursion may signal that the NLL will soon feature on the agenda of inter-Korean talks.
The DPRK’s decision to visit Incheon was highly symbolic, for it was there during the Korean War that US and South Korean troops, following a daring landing led by General Douglas MacArthur, defeated the North Korean People’s Army and pushed it back beyond the 38th parallel.
Whether the recent surprise landing will mark the port city as the starting point of a path to reconciliation and peace on the Peninsula remains to be seen.
BERLIN – In international climate-policy circles, there is broad consensus regarding the target of limiting global warming to a maximum of two degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels.
Still, barring a breakthrough in United Nations negotiations in the near future and a reversal in current emissions trends, meeting that two-degree target is well-nigh impossible.
But if world leaders abandon this target, they will have to make a fundamental strategic decision regarding the structure and stringency levels of a new climate goal.
The science-based approach of translating a global temperature cap into precise national emission budgets is politically unfeasible.
Instead, countries with a strong climate-policy agenda should advocate dynamic formulas for setting targets.
The two-degree target is the primary point of reference for today’s climate debate.
A corresponding rise in the global mean temperature is usually seen as the limit beyond which the effects of climate change could become dangerous.
But, contrary to widespread belief, the last assessment report of the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) did not call for the two-degree target, which, since the mid-1990s, has acted as a catchy symbol and point of orientation for an ambitious but realistic global climate agenda.
The European Union was the primary force pushing for the two-degree target internationally.
Ahead of the Copenhagen climate summit at the end of 2009, the EU succeeded in getting all relevant partners in the negotiations – including even China, India, Russia, and the United States – to commit to the two-degree target.
In the “Copenhagen Accord,” the UN finally recognized the target, though without any binding measures for achieving it.
There is little hope that this will be rectified at the next summit, in Cancún, Mexico next month.
Since the quantities of greenhouse gases emitted thus far will raise temperatures by 1.5 degrees Celsius compared with pre-industrial times, major political decisions are needed to ensure compliance with the two-degree target.
Climate science assumes that the global emissions peak must occur within the next several years.
Currently, however, there is little to suggest that a reversal of today’s trends will even be visible on the horizon by then.
So at some point in the near future, a growing number of voices from the climate-science community must definitively reject the possibility of holding to the two-degree target.
When that happens, simply championing a softer target, most probably 2.5 or three degrees, will not suffice.
According to the current paradigm, the global target is defined within scientific categories and understood as an absolute upper limit.
Given this top-down approach, all initial efforts have been focused on creating a global climate treaty, leading to a heavy focus on global negotiations while neglecting concrete de-carbonization efforts by industrialized and industrializing countries.
This has resulted in stalemate, because governments can always blame failure on the inaction of others.
Even the EU has used this argument to justify its refusal to increase its target for greenhouse-gas reduction for 2020 from 20% to 30%, although this would be an equitable burden for Europe to bear on the path towards meeting the two-degree target.
One possibility is to establish “climate neutrality” as a long-term global objective – i.e., work to reduce net emissions of greenhouse gases to zero.
Even if this objective were to be initially linked with a broadly defined timescale, it would establish the standard for action according to which all countries would have to be measured.
Within such a framework, ambitious climate-policy actors such as the EU, Switzerland, or Japan would face the task of committing to exacting de-carbonization measures.
They would need to muster evidence that the transition to a low-carbon economy is both technically feasible and profitable, yielding positive effects not only for the climate, but also for energy prices and security of supply.
Success would spur other G-20 countries, acting out of self-interest, to follow in the climate leaders’ footsteps.
To be sure, it would be impossible to predict, under the currently favoured top-down principle, how much temperature increase the world would have to bear.
Given that holding to a strict temperature limit is not a politically viable option, focusing climate policy on flexible benchmarks such as “climate neutrality” would be more effective over the short term and more promising over the long term.
BOSTON – As we learn more about the threat from substandard and counterfeit medicines, it is becoming clear that it is a far greater problem than previously thought.
It is also a scourge that is most acutely felt in developing countries, where fake and low-quality pharmaceuticals kill more than 500,000 people a year and affect millions more by contributing to the emergence of diseases that are resistant to existing treatments.
Compounding the problem is the approach taken by policymakers in the developing world, who are far more likely to look for solutions abroad than at home.
This shortsightedness is a grave mistake that impedes innovation and progress.
When it comes to tackling high-impact health challenges like the proliferation of fake or inferior drugs, local solutions and local innovations are not only likely to be central to any successful effort; they have the potential to provide benefits that go far beyond the scope of the original problem.
Throughout the developing world, but most evidently in Africa, two groups are interested in finding tools to combat the menace of bad drugs.
One group, comprising students, entrepreneurs, and researchers, seeks solutions that are local, original, and tailored to the needs of their societies.
While this group has produced some innovative solutions – for example, the Ghanaian entrepreneur Bright Simmons is using mobile technology to address the counterfeit-drug problem – many more passionate local inventors and entrepreneurs must get involved.
They, too, are deeply concerned about the scourge of low-quality and fake drugs, but they are reluctant to rely on local innovation.
In their minds, the solutions already exist, in the form of high-end technology designed and developed in the world’s richest countries.
The challenge, for this group, lies in finding the financial resources to import these technologies.
For developing-country leaders, the effort needed to create an ecosystem that supports innovation simply appears too great, and the return on investment too little.
At countless conferences and symposia, ministry officials and government personnel insist that funds must be found to import solutions, à la carte.
Research and innovation, or engagement with local entrepreneurs and inventors, is, unfortunately, never on the agenda.
There simply is little interest in tapping into the enormous pool of intellect, passion, and energy at home.
Raising funds to import solutions from abroad addresses just one part of the challenge.
Many countries lack the resources to install, operate, and maintain equipment that has not been designed locally.
As misuse and neglect causes equipment to malfunction, more funds become required or the program simply dies.
Not only does this approach fail to nurture local ecosystems of innovation, which is deeply frustrating; it also fails – repeatedly – to solve the problem at hand.
While some solutions in the area of drug-quality testing have come from African entrepreneurs like Simmons, such examples are extremely rare, and many are developed in the diaspora with the support of organizations from outside the region.
Indeed, by nurturing an inclusive culture of research, local innovation has the potential to provide benefits that extend far beyond the specific problem that is being addressed.
Nurturing the participation of underrepresented groups and creating opportunities for education and learning not only creates goodwill and promotes transparency and accountability.
Building a stable foundation for future research also enables more productive public-private partnerships and stronger links between academia and domestic industry, thereby promoting economic growth.
Foreign organizations, such as aid agencies or pharmaceutical companies, do have a role to play in boosting local innovation.
They can support it financially, create new partnerships, and encourage policymakers to give it more credence.
This year, the United Nations will adopt the Sustainable Development Goals, marking the start of the next phase of global efforts to eradicate poverty and improve health.
As the example of developing countries’ ongoing fight against counterfeit and low-quality medicines shows, success will depend – far more often than not – on local innovation.
A global economy includes not only the free movement of goods and services but, more importantly, the free movement of ideas and capital (everything from direct investments to financial transactions).
Though both gained in importance since WW II’s end, globalization of financial markets accelerated in recent years so that movements in exchange rates, interest rates, and stock prices in various countries are intimately interconnected.
Indeed, the character of the financial markets changed out of all recognition during the 40 years that I have worked in them.
Global integration brought tremendous benefits: the international division of labor, which are so clearly proved by the theory of comparative advantage; dynamic benefits such as economies of scale and the rapid spread of innovations from one country to another, which are less easy to demonstrate by static equilibrium theory; and noneconomic benefits such as the freedom of choice associated with the international movement of goods, capital, and people, and the freedom of thought associated with the international movement of ideas.
But global capitalism is not without problems; we need to understand these better if we want the system to survive.
By focusing on these problems I am not trying to belittle globalization’s benefits.
These benefits, I believe, can be sustained only by deliberate and persistent efforts to correct and contain the system’s deficiencies.
Here is where I am at loggerheads with laissez-faire ideology, which contends that free markets are self-sustaining and that market excesses correct themselves, provided governments or regulators don’t interfere with the self-correcting mechanism.
There are five types of deficiencies in the global capitalist system which I would now like to discuss:
Capital is in a much better position than labor because capital is more mobile.
Moreover, financial capital is better situated in the global system than industrial capital; once a plant exists, moving it is difficult.
To be sure, multinational corporations enjoy flexibility in transfer pricing and can exert pressure at the time they make new investment decisions, but their flexibility doesn’t compare to the freedom enjoyed by international portfolio investors.
There is also an advantage in being at the center of the global economy rather than at the periphery.
All these factors combine to attract capital to the financial center and account for the ever increasing size and importance of financial markets.
During a boom capital flows from the center to the periphery; when confidence is shaken it tends to return to its source.
I have seen many ebbs and flows, booms and busts, and though I fully recognize that international capital markets have become more institutional in character and demonstrate greater resistance, I cannot believe that the present boom will not be followed by a bust until history proves me wrong.
Risks of breakdown are increased because our theoretical understanding of how financial markets operate is fundamentally flawed.
In my view equilibrium is elusive, because market participants try to discount a future that is itself shaped by market expectations.
For example, a company whose stock is overvalued can use that to justify the inflated expectations of its shareholders, but only up to a point.
This renders the outcome indeterminate, and it is only by accident that the actual course of events corresponds to prevailing expectations.
Market participants, if they are rational, will recognize that they are shooting at a moving target rather than discounting a future equilibrium.
The theory of rational expectations makes the heroic assumption that market participants as a group are in a position to discount the future accurately.
That assumption may yield a hypothetical equilibrium, but has little relevance to actual market behavior, and neither market operators nor regulators fully accept the theory because they are rational people.
I am told that economic theory has gone a long way toward recognizing and studying disequilibrium situations.
Nevertheless, the laissez-faire idea that markets should be left to their own devices remains influential.
The question poses itself: What should be done to preserve the financial system’s stability?
Financial markets are best understood as a historical process, and history never quite repeats itself.
Recent turmoil in Asian markets raises difficult questions about currency pegs, asset bubbles, inadequate banking supervision, and the lack of financial information which cannot be ignored.
Markets cannot be left to correct their own mistakes, because they are likely to overreact and behave in an indiscriminate fashion.
The natural tendency for monopolies and oligopolies to arise needs to be constrained by regulations.
The process of globalization is too recent for this to have become a serious issue on a global level, but since we are dealing with a historical process, in time it will.
Since the end of WWII the state played an increasing role in maintaining economic stability, striving to ensure equality of opportunity, and providing a social safety net, particularly in the highly industrialized countries of Europe and North America.
But the capacity of the state to look after the welfare of its citizens has been severely impaired by globalization, because capital can escape taxation much more easily than labor can.
Capital tends to avoid countries where employment is heavily taxed or heavily protected, leading to a rise in unemployment.
I am not defending the antiquated European social-security systems, which are badly in need of reform; but I am concerned about the reduction in social provision, both in Europe and America.
Until recently the state’s share of GNP in the industrialized countries taken as a group was actually increasing, almost doubling since WWII’s end.
The Thatcher and Reagan governments began reducing the state’s role in the economy.
What happened instead is that taxes on capital came down perceptibly while taxes on labor have kept increasing.
As the international economist Dani Rodrik argues, globalization increases demands on the state to provide social insurance while reducing its ability to do so.
If social services are cut too far while instability is on the rise, popular resentment could lead to waves of protectionism, especially if (or when) the current boom is followed by a bust of some severity.
With the influence of the state declining, there is great need for international cooperation.
But such cooperation is contrary to the prevailing ideas of laissez-faire on the one hand and nationalism and fundamentalism on the other.
The state plays another role in economic development: in countries deficient in local capital it allied itself with local business interests, helping them accumulate capital.
This strategy proved successful in Japan, Korea, and the now wounded tigers of Southeast Asia.
Although the model worked, it raises some important questions about the relationship between capitalism and democracy.
Clearly, an autocratic regime is more favorable to the rapid accumulation of capital than a democratic one, and a prosperous country is more favorable to the development of democratic institutions than a destitute one.
So it is reasonable to envisage a pattern of development which goes from autocracy and capital accumulation to prosperity and democracy.
But the transition from autocracy to democracy is far from assured: those who in power cling tenaciously to it.
Unfortunately, economic dislocation and decline do not provide a good environment for the development of democratic institutions.
This brings me to the most nebulous problem area, the question of values and social cohesion.
Market values cannot serve that purpose, because they reflect only what one market participant is willing to pay another in a free exchange.
Markets reduce everything, including human beings (labor) and nature (land), to commodities.
In addition to markets, society needs institutions to serve such social goals as political freedom and social justice.
The development of a global society has lagged behind the growth of a global economy.
When I speak of a global society, I do not mean a global state.
We need to find new solutions for a novel situation, although this is not the first time that a global capitalist system has come into being.
For the current global capitalist system to survive, it must satisfy the needs and aspirations of its participants.
Our global society contains many different customs, traditions and religions; where can it find the shared values to hold it together?
I should like to suggest the idea of what I call the open society as a universal principle that recognizes the diversity inherent in our global society, yet provides a conceptual basis for establishing the institutions we need.
Superficially, it describes the positive aspects of democracy: the greatest degree of freedom compatible with social justice.
It is characterized by the rule of law; respect for human rights, minorities, and minority opinions; the division of powers; and a market economy.
The principles of the open society are admirably put forth in the Declaration of Independence.
But the Declaration states, "We hold these truths to be self-evident," whereas the principles of the open society are anything but self-evident; they need to be established by convincing arguments.
There is a strong epistemological argument, elaborated by Karl Popper, in favor of the open society: Our understanding is inherently imperfect; ultimate truth, the perfect design for society, is beyond our reach.
We must therefore content ourselves with a form of social organization that falls short of perfection but holds itself open to improvement.
The more conditions are changing, and a global economy fosters change, the more important the concept becomes.
There are those, for instance, who argue that values are different in Asia.
But fallibility is a universal human condition: once we acknowledge it, we have a common ground for the open society, which celebrates this diversity.
Recognition of our fallibility is necessary but not sufficient to establish the concept of the open society.
We must combine it with some degree of altruism, some concern for our fellow human beings based on the principle of reciprocity.
Any variety of Asian, or other, values would fit into a global open society, provided that some universal values reflecting our fallibility and our concern for others, such as the freedom of expression and the right to a fair trial, were also respected.
In fact, that the open society should take a variety of forms follows from the epistemological argument.
This is both the strength and the weakness of the idea: it provides a conceptual framework that needs to be filled with specific content.
As a conceptual framework, the open society is better than any blueprint, including the concept of perfect competition.
Perfect competition presupposes a kind of knowledge that is beyond the reach of market participants.
They operate in a political setting, and they evolve in a reflexive fashion.
It recognizes merits in the market without idealizing them, but it also recognizes other values in society.
It can not define how the economic, political, social, and other spheres should be separated from and reconciled with one other.
Opinions may differ on where the dividing line between competition and cooperation should be drawn.
Karl Popper and Friedrich Hayek, two champions of the open society, parted company over just this point.
Let me summarize my own views on the specific requirements of our global open society at this moment.
We have a global economy that suffers from some deficiencies, the most glaring of which are the instability of financial markets, the asymmetry between center and periphery, and the difficulty in taxing capital.
Fortunately, we have some international institutions to address these issues, but they must be strengthened and perhaps new ones created.
The Basic Committee on Banking Supervision has established capital-adequacy requirements for the international banking system, but these did not prevent the current banking crisis in Southeast Asia.
There is no international regulatory authority for financial markets, and there is not enough international cooperation for the taxation of capital.
In many ways that is a blessing, but some state functions remain unfulfilled.
We do not have adequate international institutions for the protection of individual freedoms, human rights, and the environment, or for the promotion of social justice, not to mention the preservation of peace.
Most of the institutions we have are associations of states, and states usually put their own interests ahead of the commonweal.
The United Nations is constitutionally incapable of fulfilling the promises contained in the preamble of its charter.
We need to establish certain standards of behavior to contain corruption, enforce fair labor practices, and protect human rights.
As regards security and peace, the liberal democracies of the world ought to take the lead and forge a global network of alliances, like NATO, that could work with or without the UN.
Their primary purpose would be to preserve peace; but crisis prevention cannot start early enough.
Promotion of freedom and democracy in and around these alliances ought to become an important objective.
For instance, a democratic and prosperous Russia would make a greater contribution to peace in the region than any amount of military spending by NATO would.
Interfering in other countries internal affairs is fraught with difficulties, but not interfering can be more dangerous.
It exerts attraction through the benefits if offers and, simultaneously, it imposes tremendous penalties on countries that seek to withdraw.
These conditions will not prevail indefinitely, but while they do, they offer a wonderful opportunity to lay the groundwork for a global open society.
With the passage of time, the deficiencies are likely to make their effect felt -- boom is liable to turn into bust.
For the global capitalist system to survive, it needs a society that strives to correct its deficiencies: a global open society.
NEW YORK – Donald Trump’s renunciation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) with Iran and the reimposition of US sanctions on that country threaten global peace.
Europe’s security depends on defending the agreement with Iran despite the US withdrawal.
That, in turn, requires Europe, along with Russia, China, and other United Nations member states, to ensure that economic relations with Iran can develop.
And that can happen only if Europe confronts, and ultimately overturns, America’s extraterritorial sanctions, which aim to deter trade and financial activities with Iran by non-US actors.
The purpose of Trump’s move is clear and indeed explicit: to topple the Iranian regime.
Given this folly, European citizens accurately sense that Europe’s security interests are no longer closely aligned with those of the United States.
America’s bullying approach to Iran has been seconded – indeed championed – by two Middle Eastern allies of the United States, Israel and Saudi Arabia.
Israel invokes US power to avoid having to make any compromises with the Palestinians.
Saudi Arabia invokes US military power to contain its regional rival, Iran.
America’s previous efforts at regime change in the Middle East yielded horrendous results for the US and Europe (to say nothing of the disasters that befell the countries caught up in the US-provoked mayhem).
Such “wars of choice” have been the major factor in the surge of migration to Europe from the Middle East and North Africa.
Even when regime change has “succeeded,” as in Afghanistan, Iraq, and Libya, the aftermath has been violence and instability.
And when regime change has failed, as in Syria, the result has been ongoing war.
The humiliating failure of French President Emmanuel Macron, UK Prime Minister Theresa May, and German Chancellor Angela Merkel to convince Trump to remain in the JCPOA was predictable.
The US decision reflects two converging forces: a deep-seated foreign-policy tendency – manifested by all recent US administrations – to seek hegemony in the Middle East, and Trump’s peculiar brand of psychopathy.
Trump delights in embarrassing European leaders; their squirming is his triumph.
The agreement with Iran can still be salvaged, precisely because it is a multilateral agreement, endorsed by the UN Security Council (Resolution 2231), not an agreement solely between the US and Iran.
Indeed, under Article 25 of the UN Charter, all UN member states, including the US, are obligated to fulfill the JCPOA.
Trump’s withdrawal of the US from the JCPOA is itself a violation of international law.
The essence of the JCPOA and Resolution 2231 is Iran’s cessation of activities that could lead to the development of nuclear weapons.
Strict compliance by Iran is linked to the normalization of international economic relations, including the lifting of UN-agreed sanctions.
Even if the US now absents itself from the JCPOA, it has only two means to block the implementation of the agreement between Iran and the rest of the world.
This clearly is on the US agenda, especially with the neoconservative doyen John Bolton back in the White House as National Security Adviser.
Extraterritorial sanctions are the second way the US could kill the JCPOA.
It is one thing for the US to decide that it will not trade with Iran.
It is quite another for the US government to attempt to block trade with Iran by non-US parties.
This is America’s intention; it is up to Europe and China to defeat it, in the interest of global peace, as well as in their own direct economic interest.
In practical terms, the US will be able to enforce anti-Iran sanctions on companies operating in its domestic market, and most likely on subsidiaries of US firms operating abroad.
Yet the US will try to go much further, by trying to block non-US companies from dealing with Iran.
The US will probably succeed in clamping down on dollar-based transactions, as these are generally cleared through the US banking system.
The real issue will come with non-US companies operating outside of the US and interacting with Iran via non-dollar currencies such as the euro and renminbi.
The US will certainly try to punish such companies, whether by targeting their local subsidiaries, by trying to haul them into US courts, or by denying them access to the US market.
Here is where the European Union must take a strong stand and move beyond begging Trump for “waivers” for specific European business deals, a process that would make European countries even more subservient to Trump’s whims.
Europe should defend a firm and unequivocal “No” to US extraterritorial sanctions, notably on companies operating in non-dollar currencies.
The EU should insist that extraterritorial sanctions violate international law (including the Resolution 2231 and therefore the UN Charter) and the rules of the World Trade Organization.
They should recognize that acquiescence would be tantamount to handing the US a blank check to set the rules of war and peace beyond the UN Security Council, and the rules of global trade beyond the World Trade Organization.
The EU should be prepared to use the WTO dispute resolution process against the US, and to bring its case to the UN Security Council and General Assembly.
Where Europe is afraid to tread, China will surely swoop in to capitalize on business opportunities in Iran.
European leaders act as if the US still cares about a trans-Atlantic alliance of shared interests, values, and approaches.
The US and Europe do still have many shared interests; but they have many divergent ones as well, especially when the US violates international law.
Europe needs its own security policy, just as it needs its own trade and environmental policies.
World peace depends on Europe’s defense of the UN Charter and the rules of international trade.
To achieve any of them they usually seek to nudge inflation expectations, demonstrate the transparency of monetary policy, and establish their institutions’ credibility.
To communicate their intentions simply and clearly, they may set an explicit target range in terms of a particular economic variable, or announce a forecast for the variable, or offer forward guidance by specifying a threshold value for it that must be met before changing interest rates.
After the monetarist approach failed, some switched to targeting the inflation rate.
Until the currency crashes of the 1990s, emerging and developing countries tended to target their exchange rates.
Many then also switched to inflation targets; but they tend to miss these targets even more often than the advanced countries do.
The problem with these approaches to monetary-policy targeting is that even though a particular numerical target may be reasonable when it is set, subsequent unexpected developments often make the target hard to live with.
The monetary authorities are then confronted with a harsh choice between violating their announced target, and thus undermining the credibility that was the point of the exercise, or setting policy too tight or too loose, thus doing unnecessary damage to the economy.
Major central banks can generally withstand failure to achieve targets without a fatal loss of credibility.
The Bundesbank routinely missed its money-supply targets, and yet remained a credible, admired institution.
More recently, inflation expectations in the United States and the United Kingdom remained well anchored even when the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England had to walk away from the unemployment thresholds they had announced.
These countries’ need to establish policy credibility tends to be more acute, whether as a result of histories of high inflation, an absence of credible institutions, or political pressure to monetize budget deficits.
When the International Monetary Fund comes around asking what their nominal anchor is, many declare themselves to be inflation targeters.
If they are hit by an adverse supply shock or terms-of-trade shock in the meantime, the right step would be to loosen monetary policy sufficiently that the currency depreciates.
But targeting the consumer price index precludes this, because depreciation would raise the price of imported oil, food, and other tradable commodities.
Indeed, if the shock is an increase in the dollar price of oil, an inflation target in theory dictates tightening monetary policy enough that the currency appreciates.
But such a policy would mean that the adverse shock is reflected in a sharp fall in output.
In practice, an inflation-targeting central bank usually abandons the target for price stability in such a case.
It tries to explain the failure to the public in terms of “core inflation”: what has happened is only an increase in the cost of filling their gas tank or buying groceries.
But this defeats the very purposes – transparency, credibility, and predictability – for which a target was announced in the first place.
Relative to inflation targeting, the great virtue of NGDP targeting is that it is robust with respect to supply shocks and terms-of-trade shocks, meaning that the central bank is not faced with a choice between abandoning the target and hurting the economy.
Proposals to target NGDP are familiar in major industrialized countries, first arising in the 1980s.
In the wake of sharp price increases in the 1970s, central banks wanted to commit credibly to monetary discipline in order to facilitate disinflation.
The context this time was a desire to achieve expectations of greater monetary stimulus, in order to facilitate recovery from the great recession of 2008-2009.
There are good reasons to think that NGDP targeting is better suited to emerging and developing economies than to industrialized countries.
These economies are more frequently subject to adverse terms-of-trade shocks, such as increases in world oil prices or declines in prices for their commodity exports.
Their economies also tend to suffer larger supply shocks from natural disasters, other weather events, social unrest, and unexpected productivity changes.
The advantage of a nominal GDP target is that adverse shocks of these sorts are reflected equally in output and inflation, rather than imposing the entire burden in the form of a loss in output.
This provides the sort of response that one would want anyway, while still retaining the advantages of a rule (communicating the central bank’s plans in such a way that it can live with what it has promised to do).
Many emerging and developing countries need to bring inflation down, much as advanced countries needed to do 30 years ago.
One example is India, which is currently considering adopting inflation targeting to enhance monetary discipline.
But the country is regularly hit by supply shocks such as good or bad monsoons.
Statistical estimates suggest that an attempt to set the path of inflation in the face of such shocks would lead to undesirably large swings in real GDP, compared to anchoring policy to the path of NGDP.
The target path for nominal GDP can be set at whatever level of monetary discipline is desired.
The robustness of NGDP targeting to unknown future shocks is similar whether the objective is to ease money, tighten money, or stay the course, and whether the central bank wants to announce a forecast, a target range, or a threshold for forward guidance.
If it is worth communicating a plan, it is worth choosing a plan that one can live with.
NEW YORK – The Doha Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations (MTN) is the first negotiation to take place under the auspices of the World Trade Organization (WTO), founded in 1995.
The eight previous rounds of global trade talks were conducted under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), following its creation in 1947.
The previous MTN, the Uruguay Round, took nearly eight years to complete, causing some to quip that GATT stood for the General Agreement to Talk and Talk.
But the jokes about the Doha Round, which is in its tenth year, are far worse – akin to the classic Monty Python sketch in which a customer holds up a dead parrot in a cage while the shopkeeper insists that the parrot is only “resting.”
When the parrot drops off its perch in the cage, the customer insists that it is now clear that the parrot is dead.
The shopkeeper, however, insists that the bird is only “stunned” by the fall.
Increasingly, political leaders like British Prime Minister David Cameron, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and Indonesian President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, who spoke eloquently for the Round at the World Economic Forum in Davos this year, are emphasizing that the Doha Round’s failure would cost the world significant gains in prosperity, halt progress for the poor in developing countries, and reduce workers’ real incomes in developed countries.
A Doha failure would also deal a lethal blow to the credibility and future of the WTO, which has been an almost unique example of effective and democratic multilateralism.
Just as the economist Lester Thurow famously declared at Davos in 1988 that “GATT is dead,” the current refrain is that the WTO is Monty Python’s parrot.
Given the stakes for the global economy, the Doha Round must be saved.
The High-level Trade Group, co-chaired by myself and Peter Sutherland, argued at Davos that this can best be achieved through a high-stakes gamble of announcing a date – such as the end of 2011 – by which the negotiations are declared completed or the parrot is knocked off its perch.
But the next question is this: how do pro-trade and pro-Doha leaders such as Cameron and Merkel bring the foot-draggers on board?
While many players, including Brazil, China, and the European Union, must make marginal concessions to close Doha, the focus will have to be on the principal naysayers.
The talks broke down in mid-2008, owing to the United States’ refusal to reduce agricultural subsidies further and India’s refusal to ask its subsistence farmers to compete with subsidized US farmers.
He cannot have spent a decade teaching at the University of Chicago without being persuaded that trade is beneficial.
Even during his campaign for the Democratic Party nomination, when his main rival, Hillary Clinton, was pushing to suspend trade negotiations and had embraced the protectionist narrative, Obama kept his cool and promised instead to reopen NAFTA – a tactic designed to amount to nothing, as it has.
But the Democrats in Congress who won in 2008 were financed by labor unions, which are fearful of trade, chiefly with developing countries.
Obama’s loss of support from his party’s left wing, which has been alienated by his compromises over Guantánamo, Iraq, Afghanistan, and even health-care reform, has also played a part.
Few of these officials are willing to battle for trade, having reconciled their supposed concern for the poor with a deplorable willingness to deny developing countries access to the US and other rich markets that can help them earn their way out of poverty.
Indeed, they now claim, astonishingly, that trade actually harms the poor in poor countries!
Last November’s elections changed for the better the politics of trade, as the Republican Party is now in the majority in the US House of Representatives.
Obama has already offered a pre-emptive concession on a free-trade agreement with South Korea.
With this FTA practically in the bag, the Republicans now want to see FTAs with Colombia and Panama put into that bag.
Regrettably, neither they nor the President have asked that Doha also be put into the bag.
At long last, this is surely the opportunity for pro-Doha statesmen worldwide to pressure both Obama and the Republican leadership into doing so.
RIGA – For decades, people have bemoaned the waning of Europe’s global political power.
To add some precision to the debate, in 2010 we helped to write the European Council on Foreign Relations’ first Foreign Policy Scorecard.
Back then, we wrote – rather mildly – that Europe had been “distracted” by the euro crisis.
Nevertheless, European leaders have continued to devote more time and effort to financial and institutional questions than to geopolitical issues.
Europe’s image and soft power have undoubtedly continued to fade around the world (thought such a trend is difficult to quantify), while member states continue to cut defense and development budgets.
The good news, however, is that European foreign policy has not unraveled in the crisis.
In fact, the Scorecard’s assessment of European foreign-policy performance in 2012 shows modest signs of stabilization and resilience.
Although the EU had no high-profile successes comparable to the military intervention in Libya in 2011, it performed surprisingly well in its external relations – especially given the deep crisis with which it continued to struggle.
For starters, the coherence of Europe’s policies toward Russia improved: the EU threatened to use the World Trade Organization’s dispute-settlement mechanism when the Kremlin announced new protectionist measures in late 2012.
It also launched an antitrust probe against Russian gas giant Gazprom, and criticized human-rights abuses during the crackdown on demonstrations that accompanied the March election that returned Vladimir Putin to the presidency.
There were also signs of modest improvement in Europe’s relations with China, despite a lack of unity that continued to undermine its leverage.
New EU missions to Niger, South Sudan, and the Horn of Africa under the aegis of the Common Security and Defense Policy were also launched – something that had not happened in the previous two years.
Above all, they could not break the frustrating diplomatic gridlock over Syria or stem the escalation in violence as the year went on.
Europeans remained divided on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict (though to a lesser degree than in previous years), and failed to have an impact on the United Nations vote in November to upgrade Palestine’s status.
They also struggled to pursue a united approach to Azerbaijan and Ukraine, and continued to seek a coherent approach to Turkey as accession negotiations remained blocked.
Nonetheless, the EU’s foreign-policy performance in 2012 was positive overall.
It now remains to be seen whether this momentum can be maintained, which will depend largely on whether the EU can overcome the economic crisis (which continues to worsen in several member countries), restore growth, and curb unemployment.
In this sense, European leaders are right to focus on solving the financial crisis in the eurozone.
Any future gains in global influence, however, will require Europeans to overcome their internal divisions and improve their foreign-policy coordination.
In particular, success will require turning the European External Action Service (EEAS) into an effective diplomatic corps that can convert the EU’s huge resources into real power.
There are already indications from key strategic partners that they are beginning to regard the euro crisis as the “new normal”; in other words, they are planning for a future in which European power continues to erode.
Europe’s lack of a collective defense strategy, together with declining investment in military capacity, is also a serious obstacle to its continuing global influence as a security actor.
This makes it even more important for the EEAS to align the Common Security and Defense Policy with wider foreign-policy efforts.
The specter of a British withdrawal from the EU will not make things any easier.
The US “pivot” to Asia further increases the pressure on Europe to deal with its own neighborhood.
Although the EU’s foreign policy toward Russia has become more effective, tensions have, if anything, grown – and may continue to do so.
Insecurity in Africa’s Sahel region, already a growing concern in 2012, has, in the first month of 2013, led one EU member state to go to war in a region not far from Europe’s doorstep.
Europeans are likely still to be dealing with the fallout of Islamist rebel groups’ attempted takeover of Mali this time next year, while the long-term consequences of developments in the Sahel are bound to be felt for years to come.
Despite the gravity of the euro crisis, the EU foreign-policymaking machine (such as it is) continued to function in 2012, with moderately successful results.
Just getting by, however, is unlikely to be enough to address the challenges that Europe is likely to face this year.
SINGAPORE – When the city of Detroit filed for bankruptcy last week, it became the largest such filing in United States history.
Detroit’s population has dropped from 1.8 million in 1950, when it was America’s fifth-largest city, to less than 700,000 today.
And yet we live in a world where cities have never had it so good.
More than half of the world’s population is urban, for the first time in history, and urban hubs generate an estimated 80% of global GDP.
As recently as the 1990’s, many experts were suggesting that technology would make cities irrelevant.
It was believed that the Internet and mobile communications, then infant technologies, would make it unnecessary for people to live in crowded and expensive urban hubs.
Instead, cities like New York and London have experienced sharp increases in population since 1990, after decades of decline.
One factor that has helped cities is the nature of twenty-first century life.
Previously, life in developed countries was based on daily routines: people went to work in offices and factories, returned home to eat dinner with their families, watched their favorite television programs, went to sleep, and repeated the cycle when they awoke.
In the course of a work day, people mix and match many activities – they may work at a desk, but they may also meet a friend for lunch, go to the gym, do chores, travel on business, shop online, and so on.
Similarly, time at home is no longer clearly demarcated, with people working online or participating in conference calls even as they manage their family life.
We have discovered that this multi-tasking life is best done in cities, which concentrate a multiplicity of hard amenities – airports, shops, schools, parks, and sports facilities – as well as soft amenities like clubs, bars, and restaurants.
Another factor is that cities have increased in importance as hubs for innovation and creativity.
Until the nineteenth century, innovation was carried out mostly by generalists and tinkerers, which meant that the accumulation of new knowledge was slow, but that its diffusion across different fields was rapid.
In the twentieth century, knowledge creation became the job of specialists, which accelerated knowledge creation but retarded inter-disciplinary application.
But recent studies have shown that this source of innovation is rapidly decelerating (the productivity of an American research worker may now be less than 15% of a similar researcher in 1950).
Instead, innovation is increasingly based on mixing and matching knowledge from different specializations.
Certain cities are ideally suited for this, because they concentrate different kinds of human capital and encourage random interactions between people with different knowledge and skills.
The problem with this post-industrial urban model is that it strongly favors generalist cities that can cluster different kinds of soft and hard amenities and human capital.
Indeed, the growth dynamic can be so strong for some successful cities that they can hollow out smaller rivals (for example, London vis-à-vis the cities of northern England).
But, as Detroit, with its long dependence on the automotive industry, demonstrates, cities that are dependent on a single industry or on a temporary location advantage may fare extremely poorly.
As it transformed itself into the “factory of the world,” the share of China’s urban population jumped from 26.4% in 1990 to around 53% today.
The big, cosmopolitan cities of Beijing and Shanghai have grown dramatically, but the bulk of the urban migration has been to cookie-cutter small and medium-size industrial towns that have mushroomed over the last decade.
By clustering industrial infrastructure and using the hukou system of city-specific residency permits, the authorities have been able to control the process surprisingly well.
As China shifts its economic model away from heavy infrastructure investment and bulk manufacturing, many of these small industrial cities will lose their core industry.
This will happen at a time when the country’s skewed demographics causes the workforce to shrink and the flow of migration from rural areas to cities to slow (the rural population now disproportionately comprises the elderly).
Meanwhile, the post-industrial attractions of cities like Shanghai and Beijing will attract the more talented and better-educated children of today’s industrial workers.
Unlike rural migrants heading for industrial jobs, it will be much more difficult to guide educated and creative professionals using the hukou system.
The boom in the successful cities, therefore, will hollow out human capital from less attractive industrial hubs, which will then fall into a vicious cycle of decay and falling productivity.
Stories like Detroit’s have played out several times in developed countries during the last half-century.
And, as the fate of Mexico’s northern towns suggests, emerging economies are not immune from this process.
Rather than building ever more cookie-cutter industrial towns, China needs to refit and upgrade its existing cities.
As its population begins to shrink, it may even be worthwhile to shut down unviable cities and consolidate.
Detroit’s fate should serve as a warning, not only for China, but for the next generation of urbanizing countries (for example, India) as well.
NEW HAVEN – With each passing day, it becomes increasingly evident that US President Donald Trump’s administration cares less about economics and more about the aggressive exercise of political power.
This is obviously a source of enormous frustration for those of us who practice the art and science of economics.
But by now, the verdict is self-evident: Trump and his team continue to flaunt virtually every principle of conventional economics.
Showing no appreciation of the time-honored linkage between trade deficits and macroeconomic saving-investment imbalances, the president continues to fixate on bilateral solutions to a multilateral problem – in effect, blaming China for America’s merchandise trade deficits with 102 countries.
Similarly, his refusal to sign the recent G7 communiqué was couched in the claim that the US is like a “piggy bank that everybody is robbing” through unfair trading practices.
But piggy banks are for saving, and in the first quarter of this year, America’s net domestic saving rate was just 1.5% of national income.
Trump’s deficit-busting tax cuts and increases in government spending make no sense for an economy nearing a business-cycle peak and with an unemployment rate of 3.8%.
Moreover, the feedback loop through the saving channel only exacerbates the very trade problems that Trump claims to be solving.
With the Congressional Budget Office projecting that federal budget deficits will average 4.2% of GDP from now until 2023, domestic saving will come under further pressure, fueling increased demand for surplus saving from abroad and even bigger trade deficits in order to fill the void.
Yet Trump now ups the ante on tariffs – in effect, biting the very hand that feeds the US economy.
So what Trump is doing is not about economics – or at least not about economics as most academics, political leaders, and citizens know it.
Sure, Trump has been quick to draw on some fringe mutations of economics – say, Arthur Laffer’s infamous back-of-a-napkin supply-side musings – but none that have withstood the test of time and rigorous empirical validation.
The same complaint could be made about Trump’s views on climate change, immigration, foreign policy, or even gun control.
Trump’s battle with China merely underscores his eagerness – transparent from the start – to use economics as a foil in his pitch to “Make America Great Again.”
Contrary to his bluster over unfair trade deficits, China’s real challenge to the United States is less about economics and more about the race for technological and military supremacy.
China’s massive pan-Asian infrastructure plan, the Belt and Road Initiative, together with its muscular behavior in the South China Sea, pose far greater threats to American hegemony than does one bilateral piece of a much larger multilateral trade deficit.
At the same time, China’s recent efforts to build the institutions of an alternative financial architecture – spearheaded by the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank and the New (BRICS) Development Bank – stand in sharp contrast to an increasingly inward-looking US.
Much has been written about the historical trajectory of great powers and the military conflicts that often arise during their rise and fall.
As Yale historian Paul Kennedy has long stressed, a condition of “imperial overreach” arises when the projection of military power outstrips a country’s shaky economic foundations.
It has been 30 years since Kennedy warned that the US, with its excessive defense spending, was increasingly vulnerable to such overreach.
But then the would-be heirs to the US faded: The Soviet Union collapsed, Japan’s economic miracle imploded, and Germany became entangled in reunification and European integration.
Moreover, in 1988 the US had a net domestic saving rate of 5.6% of national income – only slightly below the 6.3% average of the final three decades of the twentieth century, but nearly four times the current rate.
Back then, the US was spending $270 billion on defense – less than half the $700 billion authorized in the current budget, which now outstrips the combined military outlays of China, Russia, the United Kingdom, India, France, Japan, Saudi Arabia, and Germany.
Back in 1988, its per capita GDP was just 4% of the US level (in purchasing-power-parity terms).
This year, that ratio is close to 30% – nearly an eightfold increase in just three decades.
Can power politics offset the increasingly tenuous fundamentals of a saving-short US economy that continues to account for a disproportionate share of global military spending?
Can power politics contain the rise of China and neutralize its commitment to pan-regional integration and globalization?
The Trump administration seems to believe that America has reached a propitious moment in the economic cycle to play the power game.
Yet its strategy will succeed only if China capitulates on the core principles of the growth strategy that frames President Xi Jinping’s great power aspirations: indigenous innovation, technological and military supremacy, and pan-regional leadership.
Unlike Trump, Xi understands the linkage between economic and geostrategic power.
Not only is he at risk of underestimating his adversary, but he may be even more at risk of over-estimating America’s strength.
The trade war may well be an early skirmish in a much tougher battle, during which economics will ultimately trump Trump.
It is rare for a foreign doctor to get to China’s rural areas, where its AIDS epidemic was born and takes a horrible toll.
But recently, two nurses and I ventured into a poor farming area, Nizui in Hubei Province, as part of a Medecins Sans Frontières(MSF) team to visit the Liu family and evaluate their 7-month-old baby.
The child was the size of a two month old, but his eyes held the gaze of an 80-year-old man long acquainted with extreme suffering.
The Liu family is one of thousands of poor farming families in China’s interior who contracted HIV through contaminated blood donations during the 1990’s, when under-regulated for-profit blood banking companies reused needles and transferred blood from infected donors to clean donors after extracting the plasma.
The Chinese Health Ministry recently put the total number of HIV/AIDS cases at 840,000, although most experts believe that the true number is much higher.
Some believe that by 2010, the number of infected Chinese may reach 10 million.
After years of taking a passive, low-profile approach to the epidemic, health officials have stepped up their anti-HIV campaign.
Since 80% of HIV/AIDS patients reside in the countryside, greater access to health care in these areas has become a priority.
This past July, during the highly publicized 15th International AIDS Conference in Bangkok, Premier Wen Jiabao declared all-out war against the burgeoning epidemic.
Earlier this year, the government promised blood-products screening, free voluntary HIV testing, and free medicine for the poor.
This new anti-HIV/AIDS campaign, which the international community has lauded, is more open and proactive than before.
But it must still operate in the context of a closed society, where government control over the media limits the flow of information necessary to deal with any public health epidemic.
Moreover, it is unclear how care will be delivered to the rural front lines, where the old system of clinics based in Peoples’ Communes collapsed with the de-collectivization of agriculture.
To be effective, clinics in areas where HIV/AIDS is prevalent must provide patients with the same standard of care that is offered for other health conditions.
Unfortunately, the door to such access remains largely closed, partly because China was initially reluctant to allow overseas groups into their hinterlands to assist.
Nonetheless, local and foreign NGO’s are now starting to play a role in filling the gap between government policies and front-line healthcare delivery.
In May 2003, MSF was authorized to set up an HIV/AIDS clinic in Xiangfan, Hubei Province.
On my recent visit, I met Mr. Du, a thin-framed, HIV-positive farmer who lost his wife to AIDS last year and was desperate to prevent his infected 7-year-old son from meeting the same fate.
He had been taking the boy all over China by train, bus, and truck in search of help.
The chance that Mr. Du, and those like him, will find help in China is slim; at present, most clinics and hospitals are not adequately prepared to treat HIV-infected patients.
For example, Xiangfan’s Infectious Diseases Hospital is the prefecture’s only health facility where HIV/AIDS patients can be admitted.
On paper, the hospital appears well staffed and adequately equipped, but on my rounds there, I found the halls and wards deserted and barren.
Even a basic test like a CAT scan would require transport to another regional hospital.
But under-equipped hospitals may not be the greatest obstacle to controlling China's AIDS crisis.
Equally harmful are the government’s sensitivity to its own policy failures and the stigma attached to a disease that is often sexually transmitted.
Indeed, information is so limited and the stigma so strong that ordinary people – and sometimes medical personnel – often ostracize AIDS patients.
Patients who do receive care are often treated with substandard, even harmful, medicine.
According to the International Federation of Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Associations, patients in China can have a 40-50% chance of being sold fake over-the-counter remedies and an even higher chance of being sold fake prescription drugs.
Foreign NGOs such as MSF insist on using medications that are up to World Health Organization standards, but the Chinese government insists that such restrictive measures are excessive.
Although MSF uses its own drug supply, Chinese patients still often buy medicine with unknown ingredients and efficacy on the street.
Safety regulations must, at a minimum, be applied to the prescription of the anti-retroviral medications that fight HIV, because such drugs are extremely sensitive to dosage changes and interactions with other medicines.
Improper use of these medicines fosters HIV resistance and provides little therapeutic value for patients.
Officials there must focus not only on developing a pragmatic, realistic healthcare infrastructure in rural areas, but also on bringing about greater openness in China’s media in order to spread life-saving public information.
Like all epidemics, HIV/AIDS in China is a public health crisis that can only be solved with the mass dissemination of accurate information.
Transforming promises and policies into patient rights, awareness, and effective health care will undoubtedly take time, especially for a country as massive and lacking in transparency as China.
For the hundreds of thousands of HIV sufferers, this is likely to be more time than they have left.
GENEVA – The World Health Organization recently began sounding the alarm about a deadly new pathogen called Disease X. In fact, Disease X does not actually exist, at least not yet.
Rather, it is part of a clever public-awareness campaign by the WHO to prepare people and governments for the threat posed by new infectious diseases.
The emergence of dangerous new infectious diseases is not a matter of if, but when.
As the WHO announcement makes clear, we urgently need to develop stronger, more responsive public health systems to confront future epidemics.
But while outbreaks of infectious illnesses such as Ebola, flu, Zika, SARS, and – hypothetically – Disease X tend to capture headlines, most global health practitioners understand that noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) like diabetes, hypertension, and cancer pose an even greater threat to health and economic stability.
According to the World Obesity Federation, obesity-related NCDs could cost the world as much as $1.2 trillion per year by 2025.
That will have a profoundly destabilizing effect on low- and middle-income countries, and it could derail efforts to achieve global health security.
Avoiding such an outcome will require us to rethink investments in global health systems.
At the same time that we prepare for the emergence of Disease X, we must also strengthen the kind of supportive health-care systems that help patients live full, healthy lives.
To that end, health-care providers, non-governmental organizations, governments, and businesses in some of the highest-risk countries are collaborating to develop innovative approaches to combat NCDs.
One promising initiative is Casalud (a portmanteau of the Spanish words for “house” and “health”).
Created by the Carlos Slim Foundation with the backing of the Mexican government and evaluation support from Eli Lilly and Company, Casalud uses a multi-pronged approach to improve detection, diagnosis, and treatment of Type 2 diabetes.
It also works to prevent the disease by raising awareness of key risk factors such as excess weight.
Diabetes poses an especially grave threat to Mexico, where urbanization and other social changes are pushing people toward more sedentary lifestyles and triggering a surge in obesity-related diseases.
If current trends continue, the number of people living with diabetes in Mexico is expected to increase from 11.5 million to 16 million – over 10% of the population – between 2016 and 2035.
One of the main challenges Mexican health-care providers face in tackling the problem is that many people with NCDs are managing their diseases outside the hospital setting.
Yet roughly 30 million Mexicans have access only to primary-care clinics operated by the Seguro Popular, Mexico’s public health system for people without health insurance.
This implies a significant gap in diabetes management for a large portion of the population.
To fill the gap in care, Casalud introduced a program of integrated mobile devices and continuing education to empower primary-care providers – including nurses and clinical workers – to be more proactive in screening for diabetes.
The program’s use of mobile technology allows health-care workers (and others) to measure blood sugar and other vital indices as part of a regular checkup.
Casalud also created an online information management system to coordinate patient care and referrals, and to manage the supply of necessary medicines.
Most important, Casalud planners, understanding that primary-care providers in clinics have only a small window to educate patients on improving their own quality of care, introduced mobile technologies to enable ongoing monitoring and patient-provider communication between visits.
Before the mobile inventory-management system was introduced, 44% of pharmacies routinely ran out of key medicines; now, just 15% of pharmacies do.
The expansion of the Casalud system in recent years attests to its success.
Initially launched in 2009 in clinics across seven Mexican states, by 2015, it had been extended to clinics in 20 states, serving 1.3 million patients per year.
Now, the Mexican government has incorporated it into its national strategy to combat obesity and diabetes.
The WHO should be commended for raising awareness about the threat of new infectious diseases.
But we should also remember that global health security is about more than protecting people from the latest bug.
It means accompanying patients along the full continuum of care, to ensure that they live long, healthy, and productive lives.
To do that, we will need to strengthen current health systems, educate and empower frontline health-care workers, and maximize cost-saving technologies.
CHISINAU – Three floors of Moldova’s parliament building are a charred ruin.
So is democracy in Moldova, a former Soviet republic that is now Europe’s poorest country.
Of Moldova’s 3.5 million people at the time of independence, 15% have already left the country to seek better lives elsewhere.
More than 63% of Moldova’s young people say they want out.
In early April, a disputed election victory by Moldova’s ruling Communists triggered protests.
Political opponents and disaffected people, many of them young and with few prospects of finding jobs, took to the streets.
A violent few broke into the offices of the country’s president and its parliament building, which was set on fire.
In response, the Communists blamed the violence on the opposition political parties, which it called “fascists,” and on Romania and Romanian irredentists in Moldova.
Nevertheless, many remain in detention and Voronin continues to hurl accusations at the opposition and Romania of organizing a coup d’état.
Restoring stability and a fair democratic system to Moldova is important, first and foremost, because Moldovans deserve a government that is accountable.
Stability is also important because the country borders on Romania, a European Union member state.
The two countries share a language and culture, and, until Stalin separated them, were even part of the same state.
A vocal minority of Moldova’s people believe that merging their country with Romania would put the country into the express lane to EU membership, with its generous financial perks and, perhaps most enticing of all, passports that would enable them to escape a no-hope economy to build lives elsewhere.
Many Moldovans, indeed, already have Romanian passports so that they can travel and work in the EU.
Some Romanian officials, including President Traian Basescu, have bandied about the idea of distributing Romanian passports to as many as a million Moldovan citizens, a quarter of the entire population.
Of course, the Moldovan government balks at any attempt to lure away its citizens.
Together with the EU, the US can help ensure a credible investigation of the post-election violence and complaints against the police.
Amerca should be more energetic in demanding that the Moldovan authorities respect the rule of law, issue a roster of all detained persons, provide them access to lawyers and family members, and guarantee that they are not harassed.
Opposition leaders and democracy watchdogs say Moldova’s election process was fundamentally flawed.
The country’s broadcast media, especially its television stations, gave a disproportionate amount of air time to the ruling Communists during the election campaign.
The Communists are alleged to have rigged the balloting by adding names to the voter rolls and reviving the dead for the day.
In the long run, the US and EU should support civil society organizations in pressing Moldova’s government to guarantee more equitable distribution of television time, to stop police harassment of opposition political leaders and workers as well as journalists, to reform the police and end the ruling party’s abuse of state institutions, and to allow all political parties more opportunity to inspect election rolls and monitor polling stations.
The US can put weight behind its demands by placing conditions on its financial assistance to Moldova.
Moldova is more dependent on the EU than any other former Soviet republic.
More than half of the country’s trade is with the Union, and Moldova receives significant EU financial assistance.
Most Moldovan emigrants work in the EU, and almost 75% of Moldova’s population support EU membership.
Romania, too, should play its part and offer to sign a basic treaty and a border agreement with Moldova.
The last thing impoverished Moldovans need is an autocratic, unaccountable government that lacks sufficient imagination to find a way to revive the country.
And just about the last thing the EU needs is an influx of hundreds of thousands of migrants fleeing poverty, political repression, and despair in Moldova and other countries of the former Soviet Union.
MANILA – The Earth today is more than 1°C hotter than it was in pre-industrial times, and the terrible symptoms of its fever are already showing.
This year alone, back-to-back hurricanes have devastated Caribbean islands, monsoon flooding has displaced tens of millions in South Asia, and fires have raged on nearly every continent.
Those of us who live on the front lines of climate change – on archipelagos, small islands, coastal lowlands, and rapidly desertifying plains – can’t afford to wait and see what another degree of warming will bring.
People are being uprooted, and vital resources are becoming increasingly scarce, while those suffering the most severe consequences of climate change are also among those who have done the least to cause it.
That is why the Philippines used its chairmanship of the Climate Vulnerable Forum (CVF) – an alliance of the 48 countries that stand to bear the brunt of climate change – to fight to ensure that the 2015 Paris climate agreement aimed explicitly to cap global warming at 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.
For us, 1.5°C isn’t merely a symbolic or “aspirational” number to be plugged into international agreements; it is an existential limit.
If global temperatures rise above that level, the places we call home – and many other homes on this planet – will become uninhabitable or even disappear completely.
When we first introduced the 1.5°C target back in 2009, we met substantial resistance.
Climate-change deniers – those who refuse to believe the science of human-induced global warming – continue to dismiss any such effort to stem the rise in the planet’s temperature as futile and unnecessary.
But even well-meaning climate advocates and policymakers often opposed the 1.5°C target, arguing that, according to the science, humans had already emitted enough greenhouse gases to make meeting that goal virtually impossible.
Yet, on this front, the science is not as clear-cut as it might have seemed.
According to a recent paper published in Nature, the world’s remaining “carbon budget” – the amount of carbon-dioxide equivalents we can emit before breaching the 1.5°C threshold – is somewhat larger than was previously thought.
This finding is no reason for complacency, as some commentators (not scientists) seem to think.
It does not mean that previous climate models were excessively alarmist, or that we can take a more relaxed approach to reining in global warming.
Instead, the paper should inspire – and, indeed, calls for – more immediate, deliberate, and aggressive action to ensure that greenhouse-gas emissions peak within a few years and net-zero emissions are achieved by mid-century.
Global emissions would need to be reduced by 4-6% every year, until they reached zero.
Meanwhile, forest and agricultural lands would have to be restored, so that they could capture and sequester greater amounts of carbon dioxide.
Fully decarbonizing our energy and transportation systems in four decades will require a herculean effort, but it is not impossible.
Beyond their environmental consequences, such efforts would generate major economic gains, boosting the middle class in developed countries and pulling hundreds of millions out of poverty in the developing world, including by fueling job creation.
The energy transition will lead to massive efficiency savings, while improving the resilience of infrastructure, supply chains, and urban services in developing countries, particularly those in vulnerable regions.
According to a report published last year by the United Nations Development Programme, maintaining the 1.5°C threshold and creating a low-carbon economy would add as much as $12 trillion to global GDP, compared to a scenario in which the world sticks to current policies and emissions-reduction pledges.
The paper asserting that the 1.5°C target is achievable was written by well-respected climate experts and published in a top-ranking journal after extensive peer review.
But it is just one paper; there is still a lot more to learn about our capacity to limit global warming.
That is why top scientists are already discussing and debating its findings; their responses will also be published in top journals.
That is how scientific research works, and it is why we can trust climate science – and its urgent warnings.
Next year, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change will publish its own meta-analysis of all of the science related to the 1.5°C target, in what promises to be the most comprehensive summary of such research.
The members of the CVF have already committed to doing our part, pledging at last year’s UN Climate Change Conference in Marrakech to complete the transition to 100% renewable energy as soon as possible.
Our emissions are already among the world’s smallest, but our climate targets are the world’s most ambitious.
But whether the world manages to curb climate change ultimately will depend on the willingness of the largest current and historical emitters of greenhouse gases to fulfill their moral and ethical responsibility to take strong action.
Keeping global temperatures below 1.5°C may not yet be a geophysical impossibility.
But, to meet the target, we must ensure that it is not treated as a political and economic impossibility, either.
BRUSSELS – The G-20 governments have declared that competitive devaluations (or currency wars) must be avoided.
Excessive external imbalances, they also argue, should be monitored and perhaps fought in a coordinated way.
After all, there are no instruments to enforce strict rules at the global level, and the unwinding of today’s global imbalances – led by some revaluation of the renminbi and China’s shift to a growth model based on stronger domestic demand – might be only a matter of time.
Europe’s internal imbalances, however, are a much knottier problem.
The G-20 decided not to deal with the issue and agreed to treat the 27-member European Union as a single region.
Defined that way, the problem disappears, because the current-account deficit of the EU as a whole is only about 0.35% of its GDP, even though individual member countries have very different external positions.
This bit of statistical legerdemain reflects the political sensitivity of Europe’s current-account imbalances, which stems from eurozone members’ inability to rely on the exchange rate to restore equilibrium.
If an internal EU imbalance is to be corrected, deficit countries must accept real output losses, while surplus countries can maintain or even boost their growth rates.
Both the EU Commission and the European Central Bank argue that macroeconomic imbalances in Europe are largely the result of widening competitiveness disparities.
Thus, deficit countries have to control price and wage growth to improve competitiveness, while surplus countries may have to accept some inflation.
First, there is no close relationship between external positions and competitiveness trends – not with some of the price and cost competitiveness that the EU Commission and the ECB examine, and not with output-based competitiveness (export growth and change in export market shares).
For example, Spain’s exports have grown without producing tangible positive effects on the country’s trade balance.
The relationship becomes tight when considering the evolution of each country’s real effective exchange rate based on the GDP deflator.
That indicator is often used by the EU Commission and the ECB as a proxy for the divergence in competitiveness trends within the eurozone but in fact it does not measure price and cost competitiveness as such; instead, it captures the price effects of changes in aggregate demand.
The EU Commission’s insistence on the need to target “competitiveness” means that it is proposing a supply-side solution for a demand-side problem.
And, of course, the political sensitivity of Europe’s imbalances consists precisely in telling deficit countries that they must accept enduring hard times while surplus countries are required merely to save a little less.
Here, there is also a technical aspect that must be taken into account: it is much easier to constrain consumption through wage contraction or lower credit expansion than it is to stimulate it, especially if the high propensity to save in some surplus countries reflects cultural and institutional factors.
Moreover, it should not be taken for granted that higher prices and wages in Germany will reduce the country’s trade surplus.
To the extent that German products compete on quality rather than price, the surplus might persist even if domestic prices in Germany rise.
Finally, internal price and cost developments would have no impact on trade with non-eurozone members.
Germany is by far the largest EU exporter to China, whose trade significance, though nowhere close to that of Germany’s eurozone partners, is growing fast.
German exports to China accounted for only 0.3% of the country’s GDP in 2005, but stood at 1.4% of GDP in 2008.
If anything, EU institutions should be looking at intra-eurozone accounts.
But, even if EU members’ current-account positions are mainly driven by domestic-demand factors, international competitiveness does matter.
It is not necessarily the cause of Europe’s internal imbalances, but it may be the cure.
In principle, deficit countries may not have to go through further recession to promote external adjustment if they can generate sufficient income from exports to service their external debts.
In that case, policymakers should focus on improving productivity, rather than on price reductions alone.
Obviously, it is easier in the short run to change prices and wages than it is to boost productivity.
Still, if competitiveness underpins the sustainability of trade deficits, there is in principle no good economic reason to impose short-run measures – price and cost adjustments – for the purpose of achieving a long-term objective, unless the purpose of price and cost adjustment is indeed to dampen demand.
This is the case where external debt was used to finance low-productivity non-tradable sectors (say, housing in Spain and Ireland).
In most deficit countries, strong credit expansion over the last decade fueled unsustainable pre-crisis booms.
In this respect, the recent Basel III preliminary agreement and the establishment of new European financial supervisory structures might be more important for correcting and preventing external imbalances than recent plans by the EU to extend economic surveillance of member countries – and even to impose sanctions to enforce non-fiscal macroeconomic targets.
The immediate problem, of course, is to correct today’s imbalances.
And, given the political considerations driving the EU’s approach to the issue, the adjustment process will be anything but rapid and smooth.
SHARJAH – The Muslim world’s past contributions to science and education were extraordinary.
The Islamic “golden age” – during which scholarship and learning flourished across the Muslim world – lasted many centuries, and included the establishment of the world’s first universities.
Today, however, Muslim-majority countries lag well behind the rest of the world in terms of education and research.
This must change if the region is to provide modern jobs and better lives to its booming population and keep up with global development.
As it stands, only one university from the Muslim world – Turkey’s Middle East Technical University – makes the top 100 in an international ranking, and only a dozen or so can be found in the top 400 in various other lists.
While there are no international standardized tests in science and math at the university level, fourth-, eighth-, and tenth-grade students in the Muslim world test below the global average in these subjects, according to the Trends in International Mathematics and Science Study and the Program for International Student Assessment.
Moreover, research output – as measured by publications and citations in international journals, as well as patents – is disproportionately low relative to population and financial capabilities.
Muslim countries spend, on average, only about 0.5% of their GDP on research and development, compared to the global average of 1.78% of GDP and the OECD average of above 2%.
The number of people working in science fields in the Muslim world is also well below the global average.
Eighteen months ago, a nongovernmental, nonpartisan task force of international experts – convened by the Muslim World Science Initiative and the Malaysian Industry-Government Group for High Technology, and coordinated by me – set out to explore the sorry state of science in the Muslim world and determine how universities could help to improve the situation.
A better understanding of the various issues and possible remedies could enable science to flourish again in the Muslim world, with far-reaching benefits for its economies and societies.
Our review of the state of science at universities in the Muslim world took into account not just budgets and research, but also issues like the status of women in science studies and careers.
Moreover, we conducted a thorough review – the first of its kind – of how science is taught at universities in the Muslim world, including pedagogical methods, textbooks, language of instruction, censorship of “controversial” topics (such as the theory of evolution), and the role of religion in science classes.
In a just-released report, the task force concludes that, though the overall state of science in the Muslim world remains poor, much can be done to improve it effectively and efficiently.
The task force offers specific recommendations for academic institutions, national policymaking bodies, and other stakeholders, such as science academies, industry associations, and civil-society organizations.
For academic institutions, one major goal should be to build students’ capacity for creative thinking and critical inquiry.
To this end, the task force recommends broadening the education of science-focused students to include humanities, social sciences, languages, and communication.
At the same time, it calls for the adoption of internationally tried and true teaching methods, particularly “inquiry-based” and “active-learning” approaches.
Of course, such a shift would require professors to receive training in these methods.
Professors should also be encouraged to dedicate themselves to writing textbooks and conducting science outreach, not just publishing more papers.
This recommendation may be surprising, given the Muslim world’s low research productivity.
But the reality is that such efforts will produce more real-world benefits than a single-minded focus on publication, which can inadvertently encourage plagiarism and junk science.
The task force has recommended that national policymaking bodies grant universities more space to innovate (especially in curricula) and evolve (in research programs and collaborations), each in its own way, according to its strengths and weaknesses.
And it has called on all institutions to embrace meritocracy and shun gimmicks likes paying for “collaborations” to boost publications.
A quick rankings boost is never worth the risk of reputational damage in the longer term.
That is why the task force has now put out an open call for universities across the Muslim world to join a voluntary Network of Excellence of Universities for Science (NEXUS).
Overseen by the task force, this self-selected peer group – comprising university administrators and faculty who recognize that change must start from within – will implement the steps that the task force has devised.
The hope is that once the first group of universities’ efforts begin to bear fruit, more institutions will join.
The resulting momentum will create pressure for ministries, regulators, and other policymaking bodies – which may be the most resistant to change – to take complementary steps.
Universities are hubs of research, critical thinking, and lively debate, where the next generation is not only exposed to established facts and theories, but also learns to dissect ideas, pinpoint flaws, and help enrich and expand our knowledge base.
At a time when the Muslim world is facing unprecedented challenges, the importance of creating a healthy academic environment cannot be overstated.
One of the greatest challenges China must confront before the WTO treaty enters into force in 2007 is to prepare the country’s banking system for privatization and competition with foreign banks.
The government has established a new agency, Central Hujin Investment Company, to manage and re-capitalize big state-owned banks before they are sold.
Hujin has already injected $60 billion of China’s foreign-exchange reserves into the Bank of China, the China Construction Bank, and the Industrial and Commercial Bank.
The Agricultural Bank will also require new capital, although the government is not yet preparing it for privatization.
During the past two months, Bank of America has announced a $2.5 billion investment in return for a 9% stake in the China Construction Bank, and The Singapore-based holding company Temasek paid $1.4bn for a 5.1% stake in China Construction Bank.
The Royal Bank of Scotland is leading an investment group that will invest $3.1 billion more in the Bank of China, while Goldman Sachs and Germany’s Allianz are close to an agreement to acquire a 9.9% stake in the Industrial and Commercial Bank for a similar sum.
The government hopes that these foreign investments will set the stage for the banks to go public on stock exchanges in Hong Kong and elsewhere during 2006, whereas foreign banks are investing with an eye to penetrating the enormous Chinese market.
The big three state-owned banks have vast branch networks and employ hundreds of thousands of people.
They will focus initially on sectors such as credit cards but could develop other joint ventures.
HSBC also announced a major investment in Ping An Insurance, which could set the stage for experiments with Bancassurance in the future.
The Bank of Communications listed on the Hong Kong stock market shortly after the HSBC investment, so it has been able to provide the market with more information than have the banks that are still awaiting privatization.
Goldman Sachs is bullish, believing that the bank can record 17% loan growth this year, a 20-basis-point improvement in margins, and significant growth in fee income.
The major concern, however, is evidence of a growing volume of non-performing loans.
The Bank of Communications’ performance suggests that China’s lending boom of 2003 and 2004 could lead to another wave of defaults this year and next.
In 2004, the investment share of GDP rose to 45%—one of the highest levels in recorded financial history—as banks financed a huge expansion of property development and manufacturing capacity.
Now, the largest banks are claiming significant increases in non-performing property loans, while the glut of new industrial capacity implies that some firms may not have adequate profits to service their debts.
Alhough the Bank of China curtailed its lending growth to only 6% last year because of concerns about credit quality, many new local banks have expanded their lending aggressively, and could now suffer huge losses as the economy slows and firms’ solvency weakens.
In these circumstances, privatization will have profound consequences for China’s economy.
The recent capital-spending boom produced a burst of speculative lending in 2003 and 2004 because the banking system was still state-owned and responsive to political pressure—until the government itself imposed credit controls in April 2004 to prevent a sharp upsurge in non-performing loans.
In the next business cycle, China’s banks will be privately owned for the first time since 1949.
They will make loans on the basis of commercial criteria rather than relations with big state-owned companies.
They will be less vulnerable to political pressure from local governments to finance development projects.
They are likely to place much greater emphasis on consumer lending, especially mortgages and credit cards.
With China’s mortgage lending equal to only 10% of GDP, compared to 60-70% in the Anglo-Saxon countries, there is huge opportunity for growth.
The transformation in China’s banking system, coupled with the recent decision to revalue China’s currency, will require major changes in the conduct of monetary policy.
Until recently, an exchange-rate peg dominated China’s monetary policy, with interest rates unchanged for nine years until October 2004, as the government attempted to manage lending through administrative guidance and credit controls.
In the future, China will have to rely more heavily on interest rates to manage monetary policy, using the price of capital, not political considerations, to influence how firms make investment decisions.
The transformation in China’s banking system is complex and difficult because it involves a change in its fundamental nature.
However, barring any major economic bumps, the changes will have a positive impact, as capital allocation becomes more efficient.
Increased emphasis on household lending should also create a better balance in the economy between capital spending and consumer spending than was possible during the expansion of 2002-2004.
PRINCETON – A sense of fairness is universal among humans, but people often differ about exactly what fairness requires in a specific situation.
Nowhere is this more apparent than in the debate over the need to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases (GHGs) in order to avoid dangerous climate change.
China and the United States are the two largest GHG emitters, and it seems unlikely that any global agreement to reduce emissions will be effective unless both participate.
Yet, in international climate negotiations, their views of what each should do seem to be far apart.
As professors interested in the issue of climate change – one from a leading university in China, and one from a leading university in the US – we thought that it would be interesting to see if we could agree on a fair principle for regulating GHG emissions.
We decided to use the Gini coefficient, a common measure of income inequality, to measure inequality in carbon emissions.
The lowest-possible Gini coefficient is 0, which indicates that everyone has exactly the same income; the highest-possible coefficient is 1, which indicates that a single person has all of the income and no one else has any.
Naturally, all existing societies fall somewhere between these two extremes, with relatively egalitarian countries like Denmark at around 0.25, and less egalitarian countries like the US and Turkey closer to 0.4.
Different principles of fairness will generate different emission distributions for each population and different “carbon Gini coefficients.”
By using the 1850-2050 timespan to calculate the carbon Gini coefficient, we can analyze the principle of historical accountability, advocated by countries like China, India, and Brazil, which takes into account past emissions that have had an impact on the atmosphere.
We have selected three widely discussed methods of allocating GHG emission quotas to different countries:
The equal per capita emission rights approach allocates emission rights to countries in proportion to their population, but only for the remaining portion of the global “carbon budget” – that is, for the amount that can still be emitted, between now and 2050, without causing dangerous, irreversible climate change.
(This limit is usually stated as a 2oC rise in global temperature.)
It allocates an equal share of the overall global carbon budget, taking into account the portion that has already been consumed.
This scheme has become the de facto approach applied to developed countries in the Kyoto Protocol, which requires them to reduce emissions relative to their levels in 1990.
Thus, countries that emitted more in 1990 are entitled to emit more in the future than countries that emitted less in 1990.
The second approach – equal per capita cumulative emissions – is, by definition, a way to produce perfect equality among all countries in the contribution that they will have made, over time, to climate change.
The first approach – equal per capita emission rights from now on – results in a carbon Gini coefficient of about 0.4.
The difference shows that the dispute between developed and developing countries over the principle of historical responsibility accounts for about 40% of the global GHG emissions that can occur from 1850 to 2050 without exceeding the carbon budget.
The prevailing approach – the grandfathering principle – leads to the largest carbon Gini coefficient, roughly 0.7.
These widely different carbon Gini coefficients indicate that the world lacks a common understanding of what would be a fair approach to addressing global climate change.
Success in international negotiations will hinge on how parties – and the citizens they represent – consider a few vital equity principles, especially historical responsibility and equal per capita rights.
In the negotiations so far, it is already clear that long-term equity concerns are not being adequately addressed.
When the de facto grandfathering principle is included, our carbon Gini coefficient indicates that as much as 70% of the global carbon budget is still in dispute between rich and poor countries.
If it proves too difficult to reach agreement on a substantive equity principle, then an agreement that some carbon Gini coefficients are simply too extreme to be fair could form the basis of a minimum consensus.
For example, we can compare the grandfathering principle’s carbon Gini coefficient of 0.7 with the Gini coefficient of the US, which most people regard as highly inegalitarian, and yet is much lower, at about 0.38.
On the other hand, equal per capita annual emissions is based on a principle that at least has a claim to be considered fair, and has a Gini coefficient of less than 0.4.
We therefore propose that any fair solution should have a carbon Gini coefficient of 0.0-0.4.
Although the choice of a precise number is somewhat arbitrary, this “fair range” should establish the boundaries for those committed to an equitable solution to the problem of climate change.
MADRID – As Egyptians tensely awaited the results of their country’s presidential elections, a thread of pessimism ran through the discourse of the young people and secular liberals who had brought down Hosni Mubarak in January 2011.
The “anything is possible” sensation of the Tahrir Square rebellion had faded, and now two candidates whom the protesters deeply opposed, the Muslim Brotherhood’s Mohamed Morsi, and Ahmed Shafiq, a factotum of the old regime (and of the current military government), prepared to face off in the second round.
The triad of fundamental forces driving Egypt since the beginning of the Arab Spring – the military, the mosque, and the masses in Tahrir Square, each with different types of power and interests – was thus broken.
Those who filled Tahrir Square 16 months ago were silenced, and the expected transfer of power from the military to a civilian, democratic government was thrown into doubt.
Since assuming power after Mubarak’s fall, the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces (SCAF), led by Field Marshal Mohamed Hussein Tantawi, a defense minister for two decades under Mubarak, has consistently undermined the delicate work of democratic transition.
The week before the presidential elections, the SCAF-allied Constitutional Court dissolved the recently elected parliament, alleging illegality in the voting process.
And, foreseeing Morsi’s victory, SCAF assumed all legislative powers; severely limited the president’s powers; seized the authority to appoint the committee tasked with drafting the new Constitution; took control of the country’s budget; and claimed sole power over domestic and foreign security.
As a result, Egypt’s power struggle will continue, with the junta no longer battling those in Tahrir Square, but political Islam.
After a decades-long clandestine (although tolerated) existence within Egyptian society, Islamist forces were able to take advantage of the Tahrir protests, despite playing no integral part in them.
The secular liberal forces’ political fragmentation and lack of organization cost them dearly in the parliamentary elections six months ago, and, in the second round of the presidential election, a majority of Egyptians chose Morsi over a restoration of the old regime.
But Morsi’s narrow margin of victory (just 3.5 percentage points) over Shafiq, and low voter turnout – 46.4% in the first round and 51.8% in the second – reflect a polarized, exhausted society that lacks confidence in the electoral process and the candidates.
With Morsi’s victory, some now fear that the Muslim Brotherhood will seek to implement radical policies aimed at Islamizing a Muslim country that is already conservative, but that has had a secular government for decades.
Others do not believe that the Muslim Brotherhood will go so far, but nonetheless doubt that the Brothers will defend a secular, truly democratic regime in the ongoing negotiations with SCAF on a transition to civilian rule.
In either scenario, Morsi has little room to maneuver in a country that, for the time being, is in political limbo – with neither a constitution nor a parliament – and whose people want tangible results in terms of good governance, institutional consolidation, and improvements to a tottering economy.
Indeed, living standards have been under severe pressure since Mubarak’s downfall.
In 2011 alone, net capital inflows fell nearly 90% year on year, tourism was down 30%, the trade deficit soared to $28 billion, and GDP growth slowed from 3.8% to 1%.
The success or failure of Morsi’s government will rest largely on the economy.
For the Muslim Brotherhood, this scenario constitutes a serious challenge, one that can be overcome only by finding an adequate balance between SCAF, with its overweening power, and Egypt’s liberal political forces – which won a combined 11 million votes, five million more than Morsi, in the presidential election’s first round.
Only this will give a Morsi administration the necessary legitimacy and capacity to carry out a joint transition with the military for a true change of regime.
The liberals, for their part, did not support Morsi in the run-off with Shafiq.
But it was their efforts that made the presidential election possible in the first place, and many now believe that close collaboration with the Brothers is the only available option that can restore some of the spirit of an endangered revolution in which they were the protagonists.
This presupposes that the Brothers reorganize themselves internally and find ways to distance themselves from more radical factions, and that they promote inclusive policies toward vulnerable groups and social minorities.
For now, the Brothers have announced that they will name a Christian and a woman as Vice Presidents.
FAMAGUSTA – Turkey has tried to broker negotiations between Iran and the West over Iran’s nuclear program.
But, with talks repeatedly failing to generate any substantive progress, Turkey’s leaders are beginning to consider how a strike against Iran’s nuclear facilities would affect their country’s interests.
When Turkey’s Justice and Development Party (AKP) came to power in 2002, it sought to improve relations with Iran.
To some degree, the two countries began with a blank slate, given that they had largely kept their distance from each other for several centuries.
But Turkey’s mediating role in nuclear negotiations fueled suspicion in Iran, complicating Turkey’s efforts to establish a strong bilateral relationship.
After all, it had staked its foreign policy on building relationships with its neighbors, and its leaders believed that their country’s NATO membership and geographical position would help it to assume an influential role in the region.
In order to capitalize on Turkey’s strengths, its government insisted on participating in the nuclear talks – even hosting a session in Istanbul this year.
According to Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoğlu, Turkey’s priority was “a stable and secure region within the framework of a new global order.”
But the continued impasse over Iran’s nuclear program has led Turkey to reassess its options.
Turkey, which is covered by NATO’s nuclear umbrella, views international efforts to promote nuclear non-proliferation as woefully inadequate.
As a result, a debate has been underway in Turkey over whether to pursue the development and acquisition of nuclear weapons.
If negotiations remain deadlocked, and proliferation increases in the region, the country might well pursue this course.
Supporters believe that an Iranian nuclear breakout would justify such a move from Turkey.
Conservative AKP deputy Ihsan Aslan, for example, has asserted that, given Israel’s nuclear arsenal, Muslim countries should also possess nuclear weapons.
A nuclear-weapons program, he has argued, would bolster Turkey’s leadership position in the region.
Meanwhile, opponents contend that a nuclear Iran would only destabilize the Middle East.
Former Turkish Ambassador to the United States Faruk Logoğlu has argued that a nuclear Iran would not only threaten the flow of oil, but would also make a regional war more likely.
Despite the high stakes, hopes for an agreement are low, especially given Iran’s increasing estrangement from Turkey.
Since the establishment of a NATO missile-tracking radar in Turkey’s Malatya province, Iran has been hurling threats at its neighbor.
Iran has provided substantial support to Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s regime, while Turkey has advocated military intervention on behalf of opposition forces.
And, despite Iranian officials’ claims that they have nothing to do with increased terrorist activities in Turkey by the Kurdistan Workers’ Party, Turkey’s leaders remain unconvinced.
Turkish National Intelligence Organization Undersecretary Hakan Fidan recently visited Iran to discuss its nuclear program and the deepening crisis in Syria.
Soon after, National Security Council Secretary Saeed Jalili – Iran’s chief nuclear negotiator – headed to Ankara for further talks with Davutoğlu and Turkish Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan.
But, according to Turkish media, Erdoğan gave Jalili the cold shoulder.
The dispute over the Mavi Marmara – the Turkish ship that was bringing supplies to Gaza in 2010 when Israeli commandos boarded and seized it, killing nine Turks – remains a source of contention.
An attack on Iran’s facilities would likely bring the two countries onto the same side.
Turkey’s military is already planning to defend the country against an Iranian attack – a move that may lead Turkey to take a more aggressive stance on Syria.
And the Turkish government is preparing for a halt in Iranian oil exports by diversifying its suppliers.
In short, despite Turkish leaders’ efforts to broker an agreement, they seem to be accepting the possibility of an attack on Iran as a last resort.
Now their priority is to prepare for that eventuality, so that military conflict will not take Turkey by surprise.
PRINCETON – When people say that “Money is the root of all evil,” they usually don’t mean that money itself is the root of evil.
Like Saint Paul, from whom the quote comes, they have in mind the love of money.
Could money itself, whether we are greedy for it or not, be a problem?
In The Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844, a youthful work that remained unpublished and largely unknown until the mid-twentieth century, Marx describes money as “the universal agent of separation,” because it transforms human characteristics into something else.
A man may be ugly, Marx wrote, but if he has money, he can buy for himself “the most beautiful of women.”
Money alienates us, Marx thought, from our true human nature and from our fellow human beings.
Marx’s reputation sank once it became evident that he was wrong to predict that a workers’ revolution would usher in a new era with a better life for everyone.
So if we had only his word for the alienating effects of money, we might feel free to dismiss it as an element of a misguided ideology.
But research by Kathleen Vohs, Nicole Mead, and Miranda Goode, reported in Science in 2006, suggests that on this point, at least, Marx was onto something.
In a series of experiments, Vohs and her colleagues found ways to get people to think about money without explicitly telling them to do so.
Other people, randomly selected, unscrambled phrases that were not about money, did not see Monopoly money, and saw different screensavers.
In each case, those who had been led to think about money – let’s call them “the money group” – behaved differently from those who had not.
For example, where the control group would offer to spend an average of 42 minutes helping someone with a task, those primed to think about money offered only 25 minutes.
Similarly, when someone pretending to be another participant in the experiment asked for help, the money group spent only half as much time helping her.
When asked to make a donation from their earnings, the money group gave just a little over half as much as the control group.
Why does money makes us less willing to seek or give help, or even to sit close to others?
Vohs and her colleagues suggest that as societies began to use money, the necessity of relying on family and friends diminished, and people were able to become more self-sufficient.
“In this way,” they conclude, “money enhanced individualism but diminished communal motivations, an effect that is still apparent in people’s responses today.”
That’s not much of an explanation of why being reminded of money should make so much difference to how we behave, given that we all use money everyday.
There seems to be something going on here that we still don’t fully understand.
I am not pleading for a return to the simpler days of barter or self-sufficiency.
Money enables us to trade – and thus to benefit from each other’s special skills and advantages.
Without money, we would be immeasurably poorer, and not only in a financial sense.
But now that we are aware of the isolating power that even the thought of money can have, we can no longer think of money’s role as being entirely neutral.
If, for example, a local parents’ organization wants to build a children’s playground, should it ask its members to do the work on a voluntary basis, or should it launch a fundraising campaign so that an outside contractor can be employed?
Harvard economist Roland Fryer’s proposal to pay poor students for doing well at school is another area where using money is open to question.
If money were neutral, this would be just a question of whether the benefits of using money outweigh the financial costs.
Often, they will – for example, if the parents lack the skills to build a good playground.
But it would be a mistake to assume that allowing money to dominate every sphere of life comes without other costs that are difficult to express in financial terms.
RAMALLAH – This week’s meeting between US President Donald Trump and Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu – the first between the two leaders since Trump took office – was supposed to focus on their shared desire to reverse the Iran nuclear deal.
But the Israeli Knesset’s retroactive legalization of settlements and outposts constructed in the occupied West Bank will probably require a reshuffling of priorities.
In December, he blasted then-President Barack Obama’s decision to abstain from a vote on a UN Security Council resolution condemning Israel’s illegal settlement construction, instead of vetoing the measure.
But Trump’s administration hoped to delay staking out a clear stance on the Israel-Palestine conflict – and, in particular, Israel’s expanding settlements in the occupied territories – until after the president’s first meeting with Netanyahu.
Israel made that impossible when, just days after Trump’s inauguration, it announced its plans to build new settlements, forcing the new president to concede that Israel’s plans “don’t help” the peace process.
That mild statement, however, did not trouble the Israeli legislature, which soon took matters a step further, by legalizing the government’s expropriation of privately owned Palestinian land to build thousands of homes for Israelis in the West Bank.
Though Israel’s Supreme Court may overturn the decision, the move is widely viewed as a deathblow to the two-state solution.
The 200-plus exclusively Jewish settlements built in Palestinian territories have long posed an insuperable obstacle to the two sides’ peaceful coexistence as two independent states.
But, over the years, Israel has worked hard to rationalize away that reality, particularly to the US.
The settlement blocks located close to the “Green Line” (the pre-1967 border) didn’t preclude a sovereign contiguous Palestinian state, Israel argued, because land swaps would be possible.
And, because the Israeli government had not declared these particular “outposts” legal, it could still claim, however disingenuously, that it supported an eventual deal.
After all, the Israeli government not only permitted the supposedly unapproved outposts to exist, but also supplied them with water, electricity, Internet, and military protection.
In April 2014, then-US Secretary of State John Kerry told the US Congress that direct talks between Israel and Palestine went “poof” when Israel announced 700 new housing units for Israelis in the West Bank.
By December 2016, Obama was allowing the UN Security Council to vote on that Trump-derided resolution declaring Israel’s settlement construction a “major obstacle” to a two-state solution.
It is not difficult to imagine what Palestinian negotiators must have felt as they drove by the massive Israeli settlements on territory that they were working to include in an independent state.
Their hope surely dwindled further when they saw bulldozers arrive to prepare the ground for new settlements – not an uncommon occurrence.
The number of Israelis living in exclusively Jewish settlements in the West Bank has tripled since the 1993 signing of the memorandum of understanding between the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel.
In London early this month, Netanyahu refused three times to answer questions from the press about his support for the two-state solution.
He recently said that his ultimate aim is for Palestinians to have a Palestinian “state minus” that is limited in size and sovereignty.
It is not enough for Netanyahu that Palestinians have already accepted the notion that a Palestinian state (in the West Bank and Gaza) will account for just 22% of historic Palestine.
He wants to make it even smaller, and to avoid granting fundamental sovereign rights, such as control over land, air, water, and border crossings.
And he is betting on Trump to open the way for him to achieve this goal.
Of course, in his pitch to Trump, Netanyahu will still claim, with all the tact of a used-car salesman, that he is interested in peace, knowing full well that Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, to whom the president has assigned the task of brokering an agreement, doesn’t stand a chance of success.
But Netanyahu’s real objective will be to get Trump on board with the settlement enterprise.
What is Israel’s vision for the future of the occupied territories and the status of the millions of Palestinians living there?
How does Israel plan to escape the deadlock that its commitment to defending and expanding the settlements has created?
How will Israel address intensifying global opposition to the de facto apartheid regime implied by denying Palestinians throughout Israel and Palestine the same political rights as Israeli Jews?
Whether Trump adopts such an approach remains to be seen, though it seems unlikely.
While they are undoubtedly unhappy with the Knesset’s latest move, they also feel vindicated, having pointed out for years that Israeli negotiators, uninterested in a two-state solution, have been bargaining in bad faith.
Now that the Palestinians have more proof, they are likely to change their own political tack, focusing their attention on the apartheid-like conditions that now prevail.
The two-state solution is dead, and Israel’s acknowledgement of this will reinvigorate the struggle for Palestinian political rights in a single state.
CAMBRIDGE – With China set to lead a new $50 billion international financial institution, the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), most of the debate has centered on the United States’ futile efforts to discourage other advanced economies from joining.
Far too little attention has been devoted to understanding why multilateral development lending has so often failed, and what might be done to make it work better.
Multilateral development institutions have probably had their most consistent success when they serve as “knowledge” banks, helping to share experience, best practices, and technical knowledge across regions.
By contrast, their greatest failures have come from funding grandiose projects that benefit the current elite, but do not properly balance environmental, social, and development priorities.
In general, there is a tendency to overestimate the economic benefits of big infrastructure projects in countries riddled by poor governance and corruption, and to underestimate the long-run social costs of having to repay loans whether or not promised revenues materialize.
That said, there are huge infrastructure needs across developing Asia, and it is high time for China to play a greater role in international lending institutions.
Moreover, the official US argument – that China should invest its money in existing institutions, such as the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank, because a Chinese-led bank would likely have governance problems – smacks of hypocrisy.
Is the US prepared to relinquish its historical prerogative to choose the World Bank president?
Likewise, the US worries that China may use the AIIB to advance China’s economic and political interests.
But anyone who is even vaguely familiar with the US approach to multilateral lending knows that no other country has been as adept at exploiting its power and leverage for strategic gain.
With China’s growing importance in the world order, it needs to be given space to forge its own approach to global economic leadership.
Frankly, a relatively small infrastructure bank seems as good a place as any to start.
Besides, China is already pouring money into the developing world, often through highly opaque channels.
To the extent that the AIIB normalizes a portion of Chinese development assistance, and subjects it to scrutiny from the new bank’s advanced-country members, the new bank’s existence should be all for the better.
With its penchant for constant experimentation and improvement, one might even hope that China will draw lessons and apply them to all of its developing-country lending.
While the world should generally welcome China’s initiative, the real question is what kind of aid developing Asia needs.
Anyone who has worked in developing countries understands that weak institutions and poor governance are often far bigger obstacles to growth than a lack of funds.
And, however great a project looks on paper, practical implementation is often a sobering experience.
Costs invariably far exceed initial estimates, and planners often woefully underestimate the skills and funding needed to ensure maintenance and repairs.
My interpretation of the World Bank’s record is that its role has been most consistently positive when it helps countries with “soft” development infrastructure: technical assistance and serving as a global knowledge bank.
When its main role has been to provide financial muscle, the results have been less impressive.
In China itself, for example, World Bank money has not been so important quantitatively, yet the Chinese generally credit the Bank for having helpful blueprints and information.
Indeed, a strong case can be made that development aid would be more effective if it took the form of outright grants, rather than loans that ultimately need to be repaid.
Headline aid numbers might seem less impressive, but long-run results would be better.
Moreover, the world is awash in liquidity right now, and even where a government’s own money is inadequate, it is often possible to establish public-private partnerships to build genuinely high-return projects.
Unfortunately, it is far from clear that the Chinese model of infrastructure development can be exported universally.
China’s strong central government overwhelms opposition from people displaced by new roads, bridges, and dams, and for many years ran roughshod over environmental concerns and workers’ rights.
In democratic India, for example, it took eight years to rebuild Mumbai’s airport, because courts forced the government to respect the rights of squatters on its outskirts.
Given the legacy of problematic loans and projects funded by Western-led infrastructure banks, it is reasonable to ask whether another one is needed, as opposed to reforming existing institutions.
Still, if the AIIB views itself mainly as a knowledge bank, rather than a funding vehicle, it could provide real added value.
We should evaluate the AIIB by how it chooses and fosters projects, not just by how much financing it provides.
KOLKATA – The year 2011 will be remembered as the time when many ever-optimistic Americans began to give up hope.
But now, in the receding tide, Americans are beginning to see not only that those with taller masts had been lifted far higher, but also that many of the smaller boats had been dashed to pieces in their wake.
In that brief moment when the rising tide was indeed rising, millions of people believed that they might have a fair chance of realizing the “American Dream.”
By 2011, the savings of those who had lost their jobs in 2008 or 2009 had been spent.
Headlines announcing new hiring – still not enough to keep pace with the number of those who would normally have entered the labor force – meant little to the 50 year olds with little hope of ever holding a job again.
Indeed, middle-aged people who thought that they would be unemployed for a few months have now realized that they were, in fact, forcibly retired.
Young people who graduated from college with tens of thousands of dollars of education debt cannot find any jobs at all.
Houses bought during the property boom are still on the market or have been sold at a loss.
The dark underbelly of the previous decade’s financial boom has been fully exposed in Europe as well.
Dithering over Greece and key national governments’ devotion to austerity began to exact a heavy toll last year.
Spain’s unemployment, which had been near 20% since the beginning of the recession, crept even higher.
The unthinkable – the end of the euro – began to seem like a real possibility.
It is possible, of course, that the United States will solve its political problems and finally adopt the stimulus measures that it needs to bring down unemployment to 6% or 7% (the pre-crisis level of 4% or 5% is too much to hope for).
But this is as unlikely as it is that Europe will figure out that austerity alone will not solve its problems.
Without growth, the debt crisis – and the euro crisis – will only worsen.
And the long crisis that began with the collapse of the housing bubble in 2007 and the subsequent recession will continue.
Moreover, the major emerging-market countries, which steered successfully through the storms of 2008 and 2009, may not cope as well with the problems looming on the horizon.
Brazil’s growth has already stalled, fueling anxiety among its neighbors in Latin America.
Meanwhile, long-term problems – including climate change and other environmental threats, and increasing inequality in most countries around the world – have not gone away.
The good news is that addressing these long-term problems would actually help to solve the short-term problems.
Increased investment to retrofit the economy for global warming would help to stimulate economic activity, growth, and job creation.
More progressive taxation, in effect redistributing income from the top to the middle and bottom, would simultaneously reduce inequality and increase employment by boosting total demand.
Higher taxes at the top could generate revenues to finance needed public investment, and to provide some social protection for those at the bottom, including the unemployed.
Even without widening the fiscal deficit, such “balanced budget” increases in taxes and spending would lower unemployment and increase output.
The worry, however, is that politics and ideology on both sides of the Atlantic, but especially in the US, will not allow any of this to occur.
Fixation on the deficit will induce cutbacks in social spending, worsening inequality.
Likewise, the enduring attraction of supply-side economics, despite all of the evidence against it (especially in a period in which there is high unemployment), will prevent raising taxes at the top.
Even before the crisis, there was a rebalancing of economic power – in fact, a correction of a 200-year historical anomaly, in which Asia’s share of global GDP fell from nearly 50% to, at one point, below 10%.
The pragmatic commitment to growth that one sees in Asia and other emerging markets today stands in contrast to the West’s misguided policies, which, driven by a combination of ideology and vested interests, almost seem to reflect a commitment not to grow.
As a result, global economic rebalancing is likely to accelerate, almost inevitably giving rise to political tensions.
With all of the problems confronting the global economy, we will be lucky if these strains do not begin to manifest themselves within the next twelve months.
The answer to this question will determine not just the geography of prosperity in the coming decades, but also what the balance of global economic activity will look like in 2030 or 2050.
Increasingly, it appears plausible that this balance will partly shift away from the United States and its post-World War II allies and toward the new potential economic superpowers, China and India.
On paper, economic growth – a sustained increase in productivity– may seem simple.
An economy’s productivity, or output per capita, is a function of capital stock, labor (the number of workers and how educated they are), and an admittedly vague residual known as “total factor productivity,” which refers to how capital and labor are organized.
The basic idea behind modern economic growth – which started in the late eighteenth century – is that it involves constructing physical capital (buildings, machines, and infrastructure), increasing education levels, and combining these “factors of production” in a way that raises productivity.
You can tailor a growth strategy based on your natural resources, such as abundant coal or access to the sea.
You can grow by relying on a stronger role for the government (as in Singapore) or by relying mostly on the private sector (as in Hong Kong).
Why, then, have so many countries found it hard to grow in a sustained manner?
For at least 50 years after World War II’s end, there was remarkably little convergence in per capita income.
Rich economies (Western Europe, the US, Canada, and Australia) moved steadily ahead, while most poorer countries, despite some episodes of decent growth, did not move significantly closer to the leaders’ productivity and income levels.
The relatively few major positive growth surprises in the past 50 years have almost all been in Asian countries that focused initially on exporting cheap manufactured goods and then found ways to improve quality and offer more sophisticated products.
Japan may be considered the first non-European country to have used this development path;
China’s development is often considered to follow broadly similar lines, as documented in a recent McKinsey Global Institute report.
The most straightforward explanation is that elites in those countries figured out that they would do well from exports and associated economic growth.
Consequently, they sorted out the politics, kept corruption under control, and arranged for government to be run in a reasonable manner.
Looking at the recent data on economic performance across the world, Arvind Subramanian, former chief economic adviser to the Indian government, and his colleagues argue that convergence in per capita income is taking hold more broadly.
This is entirely plausible, and may signify – in my interpretation – that more elites now favor growth.
The demonstration effect of China may be compelling, with the lesson being that it is possible to implement the reforms needed to grow fast while staying in power.
This may sound cynical but it is actually an optimistic message, at least in terms of the outlook for reducing poverty around the world.
As a result, there is good reason to think that China and India may be able to sustain annual growth rates of around 7%, while developed countries such as the US tend to average 2-3% growth.
Extrapolating from these growth rates suggests that emerging markets could account for well over 50% of world GDP measured at market exchange rates by 2030.
The impact on the global system, with its existing structure of multilateral institutions (such as the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank, and the World Trade Organization) and myriad standard-setting and consensus-building organizations, may be smaller than one thinks.
For the US, as long as the dollar remains the world’s main reserve currency and safe haven of choice, the impact of falling to second or perhaps even third place in terms of economic output may not be so great.
In fact, the US could do well as a source of innovation and new products, selling to a larger global market.
The main factors undermining the prospects for US prosperity are mostly the result of its own political decisions.
Unsustainable fiscal deficits, questionable trade policy, a high level of inequality, crumbling infrastructure, underperforming schools, and unaffordable health care are the result of domestic choices.
Whether or not Americans come to grips with those issues has little to do with China or India.
WASHINGTON, DC – Much to the dismay of the government in Addis Ababa, “Zone 9” has become a household name in Ethiopia.
Since 2012, this small group of journalists-turned-online activists has used social media to campaign for political freedoms and civil liberties in their country.
The group’s success – measured, for example, by the flood of likes and comments on its Facebook page – has come in spite of government efforts to silence the writers, including the arrest of six members in 2014 on trumped-up terrorism charges.
Ethiopia’s government is not alone in seeking to consolidate political power by restricting what citizens say online.
Across Africa, governments are enacting legislation to restrict Internet access and outlaw criticism of elected officials.
Digital campaigners face myriad censorship tactics, including “Border Gateway Protocol” attacks, “HTTP throttling,” and “deep packet inspections.”
The irony, of course, is that censorship rarely quiets the disaffected.
Rather than quelling dissent, government intervention only inspires more people to take their grievances to WhatsApp, Facebook, Twitter, and other social media platforms, where Africans are increasingly challenging corrupt governments, exposing rigged elections, and demanding to be heard.
Leaders in nine of the 18 African countries that held elections in 2016 placed some level of restriction on the Internet to limit dissent.
Four days prior to Uganda’s presidential vote in February, President Yoweri Museveni cut access to mobile payment services and social media sites.
In August and September, Gabon’s president, Ali Bongo, seeking to project an atmosphere of calm to the international community, shut down Internet access overnight.
Then in December, officials in Democratic Republic of the Congo ordered an Internet shutdown the day before President Joseph Kabila was scheduled to leave office, thereby quashing online dissent when he refused to step down.
Internet blackouts like these violate people’s human rights and undermine democratic processes.
Last year, the United Nations Human Rights Council approved a resolution affirming that, “rights that people have offline must also be protected online, in particular freedom of expression.”
Most African governments try to justify Internet embargoes by arguing that the restrictions are necessary to ensure public safety and security.
Museveni, for example, claimed that blocking Internet access was the only way to protect visiting heads of state during his swearing-in ceremony.
But he presented no evidence linking social media accessibility and security in Uganda, or anywhere else.
According to Access Now, an international advocacy group for digital rights, people typically feel less secure without the Internet, because they cannot access information or connect with friends and family in times of uncertainty.
With several key African elections coming up, Internet shutdowns are again on the horizon.
In Zimbabwe, where President Robert Mugabe, who is 93, is expected to run for his eighth term in mid-2018, a government-led crackdown appears inevitable.
For decades, Mugabe has relied on intimidation and violence to stifle political dissent.
It is not surprising, then, that he has already begun taking a hostile approach to online activism.
Last year, his government shut down the Internet in the middle of political protests, and vowed to arrest anyone caught generating or sharing “abusive or subversive material on social media.”
While governments issue orders to cut off Internet access, only telecommunications companies have the ability to hit the “kill switch.”
That is why Africa’s bloggers and online activists must work more closely with investors and shareholders of communications firms to convince them to stand up for democracy and human rights by resisting illiberal government directives.
Moreover, civil-society groups, the African Union, and the UN should do more to condemn national legislation that aims to normalize restrictive Internet policies.
Just as it launched a model law on access to information in 2013, the African Union should provide new guidance to states on how to safeguard the right to assemble and express views online.
Finally, new continent-wide measures are needed to ensure that Africans’ online rights are recognized and respected by their governments.
Although the UN Human Rights Council’s resolution to protect online freedoms is not binding, it offers a starting point for ensuring that governments allow citizens to use the Internet as a tool for maximizing political participation.
The Kenyan, Zimbabwean, and Ethiopian legislatures are currently considering laws that would permit significantly greater government control over Internet access.
Last year, Tanzania adopted legislation that has already been used to charge individuals with crimes who have criticized President John Magufuli on social media.
Whether governments bar citizens from gathering in public, signing petitions, or accessing the Internet and posting on social media makes no difference.
The battle for freedom, as Zone 9 has shown, is no less real when the public square is the digital domain.
BEIJING – The sanctions against Iran reinstated by US President Donald Trump raise two all-important questions that have no convincing answers.
First, will this action make the world safer, as Trump claims, or will it further destabilize the Middle East and undermine future efforts to limit nuclear weapons, as argued by most geopolitical experts not directly employed by the US, Israeli, or Saudi governments?
And, second, will US efforts to compel foreign companies to observe its sanctions against Iran prove as tough as Trump’s belligerent rhetoric?
As a former Chinese ambassador to Iran recently put it: “For more than a year, Trump’s diplomacy, from the North American Free Trade Agreement, the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade pact and the Paris climate deal to the Korean Peninsula nuclear issue and the Syrian civil war, can be described as loud thunder but little rain.”
Fifteen years of Middle East chaos unleashed by the 2003 Iraq war have taught the world one indisputable lesson: nobody in the White House, the CIA, Mossad, or the Saudi intelligence services has a clue as to what might happen next in the region.
The commercial question is also hard to answer, for a simpler reason: The real extent of sanctions enforcement will not be clear until the late stages of the six-month “wind-down period” provided by the new US regulations for businesses to disengage from Iran.
But at this early stage in the US-Iran confrontation, another, even more important, economic question is worth considering: What will the US sanctions do to the price of oil?
At first sight, the answer seems too obvious to bother discussing: The oil price will surely rise as sanctions curb Iran’s output and exports, while traders brace themselves for a possible war.
But financial markets have a disconcerting habit: predictions viewed by investors as completely obvious often turn out to be wrong.
The outlook for oil prices could turn out to be such a case, for several reasons.
Oil prices are already 70% above their level last summer – and expectations of US sanctions against Iran have been an important driver of this surge.
To “buy on the rumor and sell on the news” is a time-honored principle of financial speculation.
Unprecedented recent purchases of oil contracts by non-commercial speculators in the New York and London futures markets suggest that sanctions may already be priced in, with Brent oil trading at $78 a barrel.
This price had never risen above $70 since 2014, when the upsurge in US shale production caused oil prices to collapse.
And oil for future delivery in 2020 still costs well below $70, creating an unusual market condition called “deep backwardation,” which was last seen in the autumn of 2014 and often presages a steep price decline.
Turning from speculative conditions to the fundamentals of oil production, it is far from clear that sanctions will reduce Iran’s exports sufficiently to affect the global balance of supply and demand.
While Iran’s exports almost doubled after the previous sanctions were lifted in 2015, from 1.5 million barrels a day to around 2.5 million barrels currently, most of this oil has been sold to China, India and Turkey, all of which are likely to ignore or circumvent US sanctions.
The genuinely vulnerable part of Iran’s oil trade are exports of just 750,000 barrels daily to the European Union, South Korea, and Japan.
The EU has promised to protect its trade with Iran, but even if this proves impossible, much of the Iranian oil now flowing to Europe, Japan, or other US allies will doubtless be diverted to countries such as India and China, which will free up more Saudi, Iraqi, or Russian oil for Europe and Japan.
The fact that oil traders constantly redirect oil cargoes around the globe explains why most analysts expect sanctions to reduce global oil supplies by less than 500,000 barrels a day.
A shift on this scale would be smaller than the 700,000-barrel collapse of Venezuelan oil exports since last year, and much smaller than the increase in US daily output of 1.1 million barrels projected over the next 12 months, not to mention the probable reduction in global oil demand caused by the sharp increase in prices since last summer.
In short, the Iran sanctions will have less impact on the global balance of supply and demand than the performance of the world economy and the behavior of other oil producers.
This suggests another reason why the US-Iran confrontation could lead to lower, not higher, prices: Trump and his Saudi allies now have a very strong political incentive to resist further upward pressure on oil prices.
Rising gasoline costs have already reversed almost half the gains from this year’s tax cuts for middle-class Americans.
If oil prices rise much further during the summer “driving season” that starts in the US about now, Trump will be blamed by voters and Republicans could suffer in November’s midterm congressional elections, especially in Midwestern swing states.
Assuming that Trump now finds it politically expedient to curb oil prices, the Saudi leadership can be expected to offer him whatever support he requires.
On the other hand, Iran and Russia, which had previously been less hawkish than Saudi Arabia about OPEC pricing, might now support tougher supply restraints, precisely because a sharp rise in oil prices could cause a punishing backlash against Trump.
Past experience suggests that US and Saudi political interests are likely to prevail, at least in the short term.
Oil prices plunged by 45% in1991, and by 35% in 2003, within a month of the US launching its attacks.
A fall on this scale seems inconceivable today, but oil prices are likely to head downward, despite the Iran sanctions – or maybe because of them.
AMMAN – Rather than speak of the Middle East or the Arab world, I increasingly prefer to use the term WANA, meaning West Asia-North Africa.
But, whatever we choose to call it, the danger is that the global economic crisis is providing an almost perfect alibi for governments and others in the region to continue with “business as usual,” when what is needed is a loud wake-up call.
The global economic crisis has merely helped to mask chronic structural imbalances within the region.
Over-dependence on aid and oil revenues characterizes almost all the economies of WANA.
Indeed, it is no exaggeration to say that they represent a form of life-support system.
The problem of how to wean these countries off this addiction seems to be insurmountable.
For the “Dutch disease” and a rentier spirit prevail in WANA, and have affected oil-producing and non-oil-producing countries, ranging from migrant workers’ remittances and financial investment flows from the oil countries (mainly into real estate) to stock-exchange bubbles and foreign aid.
A side-effect of this has been the widening of income gaps, both within and between the WANA countries.
Political scientists tell us that rentier economies, or economies that depend on oil and foreign aid, stimulate greed and grievances.
Indeed, oil rents eventually weaken state institutions, and this hollowing out of the state often gives rise to growing discontent.
But in a rentier economy, huge revenues from oil or external financial transfers actually create a disincentive to work.
Wealth and work are de-linked, and this applies to most industrial and agricultural activities.
Social and political mobility become extremely limited, and societies turn from production to consumption.
According to World Bank figures, the Middle East North Africa (MENA) region suffered a 25% fall in per capita incomes during the last 25 years of the twentieth century, when oil prices were low.
In this decade, thanks to record-high oil prices, GDP growth rates soared.
A recent study by India’s Strategic Foresight Group entitled The Cost of Conflict in the Middle East suggested that the past 20 years of conflict have cost WANA countries some $12 trillion.
Rent-seeking tends to lead to policy failure in the form of intense political competition aimed at gaining short-term access to revenues and benefits, as opposed to political competition over what policies might be in the long-term public interest.
The absence of a modern industrial base diminishes the WANA economies’ ability to absorb the surplus generated by oil revenues.
As a result, many countries have established sovereign wealth funds to invest their surpluses in international markets.
These funds’ managers rightly complain that insufficient investment opportunities exist in the region in agriculture and manufacturing.
The question is how to increase the absorptive capacity of the region and build a modern industrial base.
A precondition for any effective change is a shift in policy orientation from the national to the regional level.
For this to be made concrete, new instruments are needed, such as a Regional Stabilization Fund, a Water and Energy Community, regional social cohesion, and a regional industrial policy.
Without a regional focus, WANA countries risk sleepwalking into conflict and more pronounced economic decline.
Indeed, funds for “needy countries” may never reach the neediest of individuals, such as internally displaced or stateless persons, because no one takes responsibility for them.
Three years ago, the Commission on Legal Empowerment of the Poor considered ways of empowering the “bottom billion” by expanding and deepening the means by which they could pull themselves out of poverty.
Its 2008 report Making the Law Work for Everyone argues that legal empowerment is not about aid, but about policy and institutional reforms that expand the legal opportunities and protection of the poor.
It is an example of the methodology urgently needed to initiate a paradigm shift in WANA.
The nations of WANA missed the first industrial revolution based on coal and the steam engine, and then the second industrial revolution based on oil and the internal combustion engine.
The silver lining is that the absence of a modern industrial base means that, unlike more developed economies, WANA has no ailing industries to rescue.
But what is needed now are policies that will allow WANA to join the third industrial revolution – the post-carbon economy of renewable energy and the fuel-cell plug-in car.
Research on animals is performed to gain more knowledge about diseases and how to cure them, and to evaluate drugs for toxicity before testing them on humans.
In fact, animal studies have played a vital role in almost every major medical advance.
Although researchers are committed to finding new ways to reduce and replace animal testing, current technology cannot yet replace many types of animal research.
The Nuffield Council on Bioethics estimates that between 50 and 100 million animals, from flies to monkeys, are euthanized for research each year worldwide, with roughly 90% of the vertebrate animals used for research being rodents.
Gaining useful knowledge from animal research requires robust experimental findings: different scientists should be able to reproduce them in different locations.
Evidence is gradually accumulating that the majority of mammalian research animals, particularly rodents, are mentally stressed by their living conditions.
Stress is generally defined as the state that results when the brain instructs the body to make changes in order to adapt to a new or excessive demand and the individual perceives that the demand will exceed the personal resources which he or she has available.
The response is fuelled by stress hormones that flow through the body, altering every organ and biochemical function, with wide-ranging effects on metabolism, growth, and reproduction.
Although the environments of laboratory animals are usually well controlled in terms of lighting, temperature, and humidity, there are many uncontrolled sources of noise in animal facilities, most of which derive from human activities.
These include high-pressure hoses, cage cleaners, and air-conditioners/heaters; squeaking doors, carts, and movable chairs; and jangling keys.
Rodents, in particular, are sensitive to these noises, and studies show that this sensitivity does not diminish with time, as is commonly assumed.
Yet, surprisingly, many scientists are unaware that loud noises in their animal facilities can affect research outcomes and compromise their data.
Apart from noise problems, research animals are often housed in small cages with no source of enrichment, such as wheels, shelves, or tubes.
Such devices enable animals to exert some control over their environment, such as escaping an attack from a cage-mate by moving to another level in the cage or hiding.
Often, researchers are unwilling to include such items in their animals’ cages because other researchers do not.
However, rigorous standardization of the environment, particularly if it leads to barren surroundings, increases the risk of obtaining results that, being specific to a narrow set of conditions, cannot be compared with other researchers’ results.
If animals are under stress, they can have permanently raised concentrations of stress hormones, reduced concentrations of sex hormones, and compromised immune systems.
To ensure good science, research animals should be healthy and exhibit normal behavior, apart from the specific effects under investigation.
Researchers often dismiss questions concerning environmental influences on their experimental data by claiming that such effects “cancel out,” because their control animals are housed under the same conditions.
But the conclusions drawn from such experiments are specific to the stressed animals and cannot necessarily be extrapolated to healthy animals.
The increasing use of genetically modified mice since their advent 20 years ago amplifies this problem.
Genetically modified mice either lack a specific gene or gene-pair (knock-out mice) or carry a piece of foreign DNA integrated into their own chromosomes (transgenic mice), and are used to deduce the functions of particular genes.
Studies are beginning to show that an animal’s environmental conditions can completely change the results of genetic studies.
A more humane and effective way to ensure the validity and usefulness of animal experimentation would be to provide conditions that minimize stress-related activities such as excessive grooming and fighting.
In addition, the environment should allow the animals to perform the behaviors normal for their species.
Normal and aberrant behaviors for each species could be agreed upon institutionally and a list made available to all investigators.
Designing an environment to suit animals’ psychological and physiological needs would be far preferable to the minimalism, otherwise known as “standardization,” that is currently employed.
Both the welfare of research animals and the quality of the science would be markedly improved, leading to data that could be meaningfully applied to our quest for medical knowledge.
NEWTON, MASSACHUSETTS – Can you imagine a French citizen being elected President of the United States?
Indeed, even if there were no legal obstacles, it would be difficult to imagine voters in a democracy installing a foreigner in their government’s top job.
But, during the last few years, countries have increasingly turned to foreigners and people with considerable foreign experience to assume what is generally viewed as a country’s second most important position: head of the central bank.
For example, Stanley Fischer, nominated in January by US President Barack Obama to succeed Janet Yellen as Vice Chair of the Federal Reserve, is an American immigrant from southern Africa who served as Governor of the Bank of Israel from 2005 until last year.
And, in July 2013, Mark Carney, a Canadian who had served as central-bank governor in his home country, became the first foreigner to lead the Bank of England in its nearly 320-year history.
Similarly, the widely respected governor of Ireland’s central bank, Patrick Honohan, spent nearly a decade at the World Bank in Washington, DC.
One of Honohan’s deputies is a Swede with experience at the Hong Kong Monetary Authority; the other is a Frenchman.
This represents a major departure from the tradition of filling central banks’ top leadership positions with people who have spent most of their careers there – a tradition that, over time, allowed central banks to be taken over by “groupthink.”
With the entrenchment of a particular ideology or mode of thinking, monetary policymakers increasingly missed – by choice or inertia – opportunities to change, reinvigorate, and improve the running of these vital institutions.
As central banks’ key role in the recovery from the post-2008 global economic crisis demonstrated, monetary policy must be flexible and innovative.
The Fed’s experience – shaped by a historically decentralized power structure – highlights the benefits of a policymaking process characterized by diverse views.
When the Fed was established a century ago, monetary authority was distributed across 12 regional reserve banks, each of which had considerable autonomy.
The fact that the heads of each of the regional Fed banks were called “governor” – the same title given to heads of the long-established European central banks – was indicative of their authority.
But, in the aftermath of the Great Depression of the 1930’s, it became clear that such decentralization had prevented the Fed from formulating and implementing a coherent monetary policy.
The heads of the regional banks were “downgraded” from governors to “presidents” – the first and only time in US history when the transition from governor to president was a demotion – and power was centralized in the Board of Governors based in Washington, DC.
Nonetheless, an important legacy of the earlier system has remained: each of the regional banks maintains its own research department, and brings a different approach to the monetary-policy debate.
In other words, the Fed’s structure continues to foster a robust and diverse mix of views – something that is severely lacking in many other central banks.
Years ago, an employee at one of the regional Fed banks – who was also my graduate-school classmate – contrasted the responses to his research presentations in the United States and Canada.
Whereas staff economists from the Federal Reserve System brought differing perspectives to the monetary-policy debate, their Canadian counterparts seemed to subscribe to a single “Bank of Canada view.”
Two independent reviews of the Bank of England published in the wake of the global financial crisis found a similar lack of intellectual diversity and robust debate.
One observed that Bank of England staff members tended to “filter” their advice to make it more palatable to their superiors.
The other concluded that the crisis highlighted just how wrong the consensus view had been, and recommended a new approach that considered divergent views.
This desire for change may have contributed to Carney’s appointment as the new governor, and his recent decision to bring more outside expertise into the Bank’s leadership.
Avoiding groupthink is essential to developing innovative, effective policies capable of responding to new monetary-policy challenges – and that demands a flexible, dynamic policymaking process.
The good news is that central banks have options for enriching their policy debates, even without the benefit of the Fed’s size, structure, and geographic spread.
For starters, they can establish committees of outside experts or commission regular external reviews of policy and the policymaking process.
Such reviews typically take place only after a crisis – when it is already too late.
Another solution is to appoint a governor from outside the central bank, preferably one who has enough external experience to avoid being captured by groupthink.
Though triggered by the need to devise an exit strategy from the Iraqi quagmire, the Iraq Study Group’s grim report is a devastating indictment of the Bush administration’s entire foreign policy.
The report challenges the core principles of a faith-driven administration and of a president whose political gospel led him to a sharp departure from the culture of conflict resolution in favor of a crusade based on raw power.
A war that cannot be ended is sometimes worse than a war that is lost.
Therefore, the Iraq report is more than a plan to rescue Iraq; it is a road map for extricating America from the mayhem of an unwinnable war.
However much the study group shunned recommendations for a precipitous withdrawal, and avoided strict timetables for disengagement, their report is not only an unequivocal repudiation of Bush’s “stay the course” obsession, but also a counsel to cut and run.
Indeed, there is no realistic chance that the Iraqi army and police will be able to take over combat responsibilities and effective policing any time soon.
Nor is it at all clear to what degree the Iraqis retain a stake in the idea of a united Iraqi state worth fighting for.
The report practically calls for ending all support to the Iraqi government if it fails to assume its responsibilities.
None of the Middle East’s problems has a military solution, and none can be solved through unilateral action.
The report is therefore right to challenge Bush’s insistence on discarding both Iran and Syria as interlocutors for a more stable regional order.
Iran has the most leverage inside Iraq, and Syria has become a vital crossing point for weapons and insurgents into the Iraqi battlefield.
There is simply no way that Iraq can be stabilized without America moving from a policy of disengagement to one of engagement with these two major regional spoilers.
The report thus stands as a rebuke to Bush’s entire “axis of evil” philosophy.
It refuses to ascribe to Iran’s secretive state an ideological rigidity that might not exist.
Indeed, Iran has shown its ability to behave with startling pragmatism more than once, not least in its links to Israel and the United States during its war against Iraq in the 1980’s, and in its assistance to the Americans in the war against the Taliban in Afghanistan.
But it is not only Iraq that requires regional support groups to reach a modicum of stability.
All the problems of the Middle East – Iraq, the Arab-Israeli dispute, the need for political reforms, and Islamic terrorism – are interconnected.
The interconnectedness of the problems in the outer circle of the region and those pertaining to the Arab-Israeli conflict in the inner circle was shown by the first Bush administration, which, in October 1991, following the first Gulf War, organized a major international conference aimed at securing an Arab-Israeli peace.
Neither the Israeli government nor its intimate ally in the White House can be expected to applaud the Iraq Study Group’s call for a repetition of that logic, for it contradicts everything the Bush administration has championed.
The report’s recommendation for an international conference in the style of the Madrid peace conference is not only a timely indication of the linkage between the Israeli-Arab conflict and the region’s other troubles; it is also a long overdue reminder that bilateral negotiations between the parties can not produce an agreement.
That realization prompted the all-Arab peace initiative of 2002, which established the conditions for an Israeli-Arab comprehensive settlement.
Alas, however bipartisan the Iraq Study Group’s report may be, it is too much to expect that Bush will endorse all of its recommendations and admit the bankruptcy of his entire foreign policy.
In fact, Bush has already expressed his objection to unconditional direct talks with Iran and Syria.
Nor does he seem eager to open a rift with Israel by dragging its government to an international conference, the way his father did with Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir in 1991.
Bush will find it especially difficult to change his policy with respect to Iran.
In order to ensure that the US is too harassed to be able to threaten it, Iran has consistently obstructed Bush’s mission of regional transformation.
The report urges the president to understand that the spoilers will not cease to be spoilers as a precondition of negotiations, but only as a result of them.
At stake is a painful choice for Bush: to lead America into coexistence with what he considers a repugnant Islamic theocracy.
But Bush does not have many choices if he is to save his presidency from going down in history as an utter failure.
If he does not change course in Iraq and beyond, his presidency might draw the curtain on long decades of American hegemony in the Middle East – to the detriment of its closest allies in the region.
NEW YORK – When Mary Barra was named CEO of General Motors in early December – the first woman to head a major American automaker – it seemed to many to be a milestone in women’s struggle for equal rights and opportunities.
But, in a climate in which, as Catalyst, the feminist glass-ceiling watchdog, points out, only 4.2% of US Fortune 500 CEOs are women, is Barra’s promotion really a victory?
In the United States, by one count, two-thirds of professional journalists are men, and men account for almost 90% of bylines in economics and business reporting in traditional media.
In fact, the reflexive worldview of male-dominated business-news coverage invalidates all talk of a victory, whether for Barra or for the rest of us – including impressionable 15-year-old girls seeking role models and a message of empowerment.
Feminist analysts of language and media in the 1970’s, notably the critic Dale Spender, examined how language is used to deny women credit, power, and agency when their successes are noted.
Many news stories about female CEOs and other high-achieving women are coded with a set of reliable clichés: they lucked into their new roles (and thus do not deserve them), inherited them from male relatives or spouses (and thus do not really hold the reins of power), or will not be there for long.
If all else fails, coverage concentrates so narrowly on gender that a woman’s very leadership is weakened.
These clichés not only undermine successful women’s reputations; in the case of CEOs, they also reduce their value to their companies.
And all of these clichés were reproduced in the coverage of Barra’s appointment at GM.
For example, CNN covered the story by referring to Barra’s “knack for climbing the corporate ladder” – a phrase with some suggestive undertones, and one that would never be used with a man at the top, for whom, presumably, hard work, talent, ambition, and dedication constitute more than a “knack.”
It concluded by suggesting that Barra will have succeeded when people no longer call her “car girl” but “boss” – though the report offers no evidence that anyone is in fact calling Barra “car girl” rather than “boss.”
Likewise, the New York Times led with Barra’s father, and its headline suggested that she was “born to” her role, as if ambition and hard work had nothing to do with her ascent.
It notes the car her husband drives and describes her as “soft-spoken.”
And it includes an excruciating quote from her predecessor, Daniel F. Akerson: “Mary was picked for her talent, not her gender.”
Promoting Barra, he goes on to say, “was almost like watching your daughter graduate from college.”
It is difficult to imagine a black male middle-aged CEO (Barra is 51) being introduced to reporters with the assurance that “he was not picked for his race.”
And it is difficult to imagine his white colleague telling the national press that watching this 51-year-old man lead is like watching a 22-year-old “son” receive his BA.
Then there is the “Potemkin CEO” approach, which implicitly assumes that powerful men would never really choose a woman to lead an important institution.
According to this cliché, Barra’s promotion must be a public-relations ploy, with men retaining the real power behind the façade.
So we get this headline from Fortune magazine: “Is GM’s Board Setting up Mary Barra to Fail as New CEO?”
The article goes on to explain that being surrounded by male rivals for her job may fatally weaken Barra, as if male CEOs were not also surrounded by would-be rivals.
Perhaps that is because she really is just a lady first, not a manager.
An interview in the New York Times’ business section manages to focus the entire discussion on how things have changed for women at GM, rather than on what Barra intends to change at GM as CEO, or even on how things have changed in the car industry – surely an important question.
The interviewer even asks at the end whether her husband is a GM employee.
With coverage like this, news becomes more than news; it becomes a real-world outcome that negatively affects a company’s bottom-line.
Why would a major corporation – especially one like GM, which suffered a serious crisis that led to a massive government bailout in 2008 – risk appointing leaders, no matter how talented, who are bound to generate devaluing news coverage such as this?
I cannot fathom why serious journalists commit such egregious breaches of basic professional norms of fairness and impartiality.
When they do, they are performing the role of guard dogs of an endangered patriarchy, defending – and thus strengthening – the glass ceiling.
PRINCETON – Crises, especially very severe ones, are often learning opportunities.
Unfortunately, so far the world seems to have learned very little from the recent financial crisis.
In fact, the situation today is just as dangerous as it was in 2007, with the United States now worried by its anemic economic recovery, Europe paralyzed by fears for the survival of its currency union, and emerging markets wrestling with asset-price bubbles.
Collectively, we have done well on the former, and very poorly on the latter.
Most explanations of the causes of the post-2007 financial crisis point to five sources of instability.
First, the crisis was precipitated by the peculiarities of the US real-estate market, by government incentives for increased homeownership, and in imprudent lending by financial institutions.
Internally, bankers had enormous potential to benefit from risky moves, but were insulated from the costs of failure.
For individual institutions, this was not seen as a problem, because they were protected by the logic of being “too big to fail.”
When the crisis erupted – owing to a downturn in the US housing market that was clearly foreseeable but willfully unforeseen – the public sector had to absorb the contingent liabilities built up in the financial system.
Long-term current-account surpluses in some countries (China, other rapidly growing Asian economies, and Gulf oil producers) permitted the long-term financing of deficits in others (the United Kingdom, Australia, Spain, Ireland, and, above all, the US).
Fourth, central banks, especially in the US, mistakenly maintained loose monetary policy.
With dollar financing by the Federal Reserve available to large institutions, the Fed became the equivalent of a world central bank.
Finally, once the crisis erupted, the fiscal consequences of bailing out too-big-to-fail financial institutions contributed to rapid public-debt unsustainability, which threatens to boomerang on the banking sector.
None of these issues, with the possible exception of the first, has been resolved.
Of course, some discussion of financial-sector reform is taking place in a variety of forums, with a gradual consensus building around sliding or incremental capital-adequacy rules.
But many systemically important banks became bigger rather than smaller as a result of the crisis.
Moreover, while global imbalances were immediately reduced in the course of the initial crisis, with the US adjusting its deficit relatively rapidly, they are now re-emerging.
The world’s major industrial economies, meanwhile, are maintaining very low interest rates.
Before 2007, such a policy was seen as a mistake at worst; now it is interpreted as a malign strategy.
There is a widespread suspicion that the US is deliberately pursuing dollar depreciation (or “currency wars,” in the words of Brazil’s finance minister).
We do not know how to handle the fiscal issues posed by the financial crisis.
Doubts about the sustainability of government debt produce sudden surges in interest rates, as risk premia rise dramatically with perceptions of the likelihood of default.
But hints of new fiscal imprudence or of backsliding on long-term debt consolidation and reduction can drive up borrowing costs dramatically.
In these circumstances, the additional costs of debt service easily outweigh any gains that might come from some measure of fiscal relaxation.
As a result, fiscal uncertainty is affecting all major industrial countries, and producing political paralysis.
So, while we understand very well what may have produced the financial crisis, we find ourselves helpless to draw usable lessons from it.
It took a good deal of time to learn what we all now take to be the lessons of the interwar Great Depression.
It was only 30 years later, in the 1960’s, that Keynesian fiscal policy was widely accepted.
It was also only in the 1960’s that Milton Friedman clearly formulated the Great Depression’s monetary lessons.
During the Great Depression, a spiral of protectionist trade quotas and tariff restrictions was used to combat monetary deflation, as popular demand for political action met legislative “log-rolling” by representatives of groups with very different – and often very locally oriented – policy priorities.
The political scientist E.E. Schattschneider’s analysis of the process was influential in transferring responsibility for trade measures from the US Congress to the President.
The modern equivalent of that learning about trade policy would be to think about mechanisms to ensure long-term improvement in fiscal policymaking.
In particular, it would be helpful to devise a way to identify potential risks to fiscal stability (such as those implied by an over-extended banking and financial system).
Moreover, there is a need to limit legislative pressure for additional spending on locally important projects that fuel overall fiscal dysfunction.
The constructive (and relatively quick) trade-policy response in the aftermath of the Great Depression did not pay off immediately.
But, in the long run, it produced a much better policymaking environment.
Now is the moment to launch an analogous effort to reform and rationalize the political process that produces fiscal policy.
PARIS: Save for the Netherlands, Europe's economies are languishing: according to the OECD, average growth in Western Europe will not exceed 1.6% this year, a drop from the 2.7% growth last year.
At the same time United States is growing at 2.2%, Japan at 2.6%, ... and China at 10.5.
The economic slowdown comes at the worst possible moment, as Europe readies itself for monetary union (emu), and the tough budget constraints imposed as a precondition for joining limit the governments' ability to use old fashioned stimulants to get their ailing economies moving.
Quite to the contrary, the governments are told they must slash their social spending at the very time when their populations are getting restless.
As a consequence, to the extent that European union is thought of in predominantly liberal economic terms, support for new European institutions may be in jeopardy.
The exit by the British pound and Italian lira in September 1992 from the European Monetary System gave those two countries spurts of growth.
But those surges are subsiding and can't be repeated: Italy, reconciling itself to a modest 1.7% rate of growth, is putting forth the idea of revising the Maastricht criteria for achieving monetary union in 1999.
In the UK, major trade union strikes have returned to the scene for the first time since early in the Thatcher era.
Even more ominously, the most stalwart supporters of further economic integration, Germany and France, are also exhibiting the most strains from today's economic asphyxiation.
German GDP will grow a mere 0.5% in 1996, barely a fifth of Chancellor Kohl's modest projections last year.
With 1% instead of the 2.2% growth forecast last spring, France is not much better.
Unemployment is also very high in both countries: 12.5% on this side of the Rhine, 10.2% on the other.
All the while, Bill Clinton can boast of the creation of ten million new jobs since his arrival at the White House in 1993.
A part of Germany’s difficulty is due to the cost of unification with East Germany, which absorbs about 5% of GDP annually and contributes to one of the highest percentages of public expenditure in the world.
The "employment pact" concluded at the beginning of the year between the government and employee and employer organizations, indeed, was scuttled when Chancellor Kohl unilaterally decreed reductions in social spending on the order of DM50 billion so as to meet a looming budget crunch and prepare the ground for meeting the conditions for emu membership.
The OECD thinks these cuts are still insufficient, but Germany's usually polite unions now speak of "acts of force" and 350,000 people demonstrated last June in Bonn to protest the import of "capitalism American style" and demand the Chancellor’s resignation.
To be sure, Germany is not fraying at the seams: social consensus remains a German secular faith and the Social Democrats have not found a plausible man to challenge Helmut Kohl.
But cutting back on the country's vaunted social protection system seems to strike at the roots of German postwar democracy.
The French state does not have unification to finance, so you might think its plight easier.
But French citizens have an ingrained habit of demanding that government solve every problem, no matter how trivial and this is costly too.
Hence the extreme unpopularity of all measures designed to reduce the public deficit and debt, with strikes breaking out all over the map.
Dissatisfaction is made worse by the government's mistakes: on the strength of widely expected economic recovery, it predicted in June 1995 the creation of 700,000 jobs over the next two years.
Today, fear of unemployment limits consumption, lowering still further the state’s fiscal revenues.
And with the prospect of general elections in 1998, the political front is infinitely less quiet than in Germany.
Not only are the forces of opposition — socialists, communists, and the extreme right — attacking the government on all fronts, but the ruling Gaullist majority is beginning to crack.
What makes this slump different is that the French blame European union, and increasing economic globalization in general, for their troubles which they expect to be more lasting than in the past.
The danger, then, is that European unity may be seriously set back in the eyes of the confused public.
To appease the mood of dissatisfaction, Prime Minister Alain Juppé recently announced a reduction of income taxes scheduled for 1997.
But 70% of the French, when asked about this measure, do not believe it will work.
Despite his past readiness to stray from the path of orthodoxy, President Chirac gives only an ambiguous blessing to his Prime Minister, losing no opportunity to express his agreement with the strict policies of Helmut Kohl.
No doubt he remembers a past fiasco of his own making when, in 1974 as prime minister under Giscard d’Estaing, he attempted to incite economic recovery through inflation.
Governments that push monetary union do so without being quite sure of what type of Europe they want to build.
Unless and until Europe's leaders shed their confusions, and speak plainly to their citizens about their thinking and their purposes, Europe's economic malaise will likely lead to a dangerous brew of monetary muddle and social unrest.
At the same time, Washington doesn't even want to hear any talk about conferring on a European, as France demands, command of the allied fleet in the Mediterranean.
Who, indeed, can imagine America's Senate agreeing that a foreigner might hold in his hands the fate of the prestigious 6th Fleet, the most powerful naval armada in the world?
Also simultaneously, the United States has made it clear that no one will be able, in Africa or elsewhere, to follow a policy that excludes the United States.
Yet America demands that it should be left alone to put back on track the delicate Israeli-Palestinian peace process, in jeopardy since the assassination of Yitzak Rabin and the Israeli right's return to power in Jerusalem.
General de Gaulle is no longer here, and no real rupture between Paris and Washington is on the horizon, even if on some issues -- Rwanda and Zaire, for example -- the views of the two governments are at opposite poles.
But recent tiffs point to fundamental differences with respect to how both countries view NATO.
General de Gaulle and his successors have never given up the idea of conducting a foreign policy independent of America.
They have always viewed European unity as a means to such a policy, to the extent that, union being strength, it can serve to reduce the disequilibrium of power between the United States and its allies across the Atlantic.
For four decades, the existence of the Soviet Union, from which France was protected by the German buffer zone, gave French presidents a certain freedom of action vis ŕ vis the United States, all the while it being clear that whenever a major crisis occurred -- in Berlin, Cuba, or the Gulf War -- no one was as strong in their support of the Americans as the French.
Perhaps one day Russia will become a threat again, but for the moment it is more threatened by its own internal disintegration.
Perhaps China will one day be tempted to renew its dream of an empire which, throughout the ages, has never ceased to haunt the great powers.
But the fact remains that, for the moment, America is the only superpower, thus limiting France's freedom to act in the world independently.
American power, its foreign trade, rises in the price of oil, and the industrialization of China and Latin America, make it impossible for America to lose interest in the rest of the planet.
Indeed, the Congress makes no bones about legislating against countries guilty of trading with Iran, Iraq, or Cuba.
Bill Clinton, elected in 1992 against George Bush (whom Clinton accused of being solely interested in foreign policy) is tending more and more to become personally involved in foreign affairs, a habit of all second term US presidents, with one eye cast on the history books.
In this Clinton is encouraged by a Europe shown incapable of solving by itself the Bosnian tragedy.
But this cheerleading is not the case where Europe's economic interests are at stake: it is enough to look at the EU's refusal to join the embargo against Cuba, the strength of Germany's reaction to the merger of America's two airplane manufacturers Boeing and McDonnell-Douglas, or the determination with which the EU fifteen are pushing forward with monetary union.
The importance of unemployment on the old continent, as against an America which created six million new jobs in the last four years, is sufficient to explain this independent attitude.
What remains to be seen is what will be the value of the EU's new currency, the euro, against the dollar.
Will the single currency turn out to be an instrument of independence or of renewed alignment?
Will America view the euro's establishment as an aid or a threat to the dollar?
These questions are certainly much more important than those that contributed to the outbreak of the idea of renewed Franco-American crisis.
The answers to them will go a long way toward determining not only long-term relations between Washington and Paris, but between America and all of Europe.
NEW YORK – Economics is often called the dismal science, and for the last half-decade it has come by its reputation honestly in the advanced economies.
Real (inflation-adjusted) per capita GDP in France, Greece, Italy, Spain, the United Kingdom, and the United States is lower today than before the Great Recession hit.
Indeed, Greece’s per capita GDP has shrunk nearly 25% since 2008.
There are a few exceptions: After more than two decades, Japan’s economy appears to be turning a corner under Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s government; but, with a legacy of deflation stretching back to the 1990’s, it will be a long road back.
And Germany’s real per capita GDP was higher in 2012 than it was in 2007 – though an increase of 3.9% in five years is not much to boast about.
Elsewhere, though, things really are dismal: unemployment in the eurozone remains stubbornly high and the long-term unemployment rate in the US still far exceeds its pre-recession levels.
In Europe, growth appears set to return this year, though at a truly anemic rate, with the International Monetary Fund projecting a 1% annual increase in output.
In fact, the IMF’s forecasts have repeatedly proved overly optimistic: the Fund predicted 0.2% growth for the eurozone in 2013, compared to what is likely to be a 0.4% contraction; and it predicted US growth to reach 2.1%, whereas it now appears to have been closer to 1.6%.
With European leaders wedded to austerity and moving at a glacial pace to address the structural problems stemming from the eurozone’s flawed institutional design, it is no wonder that the continent’s prospects appear so bleak.
But, on the other side of the Atlantic, there is cause for muted optimism.
Revised data for the US indicate that real GDP grew at an annual pace of 4.1% in the third quarter of 2013, while the unemployment rate finally reached 7% in November – the lowest level in five years.
A half-decade of low construction has largely worked off the excess building that occurred during the housing bubble.
The development of vast reserves of shale energy has moved America toward its long-sought goal of energy independence and reduced gas prices to record lows, contributing to the first glimmer of a manufacturing revival.
And a booming high-tech sector has become the envy of the rest of the world.
Most important, a modicum of sanity has been restored to the US political process.
Automatic budget cuts – which reduced 2013 growth by as much as 1.75 percentage points from what it otherwise would have been – continue, but in a much milder form.
Moreover, the cost curve for health care – a main driver of long-term fiscal deficits – has bent down.
Already, the Congressional Budget Office projects that spending in 2020 for Medicare and Medicaid (the government health-care programs for the elderly and the poor, respectively) will be roughly 15% below the level projected in 2010.
It is possible, even likely, that US growth in 2014 will be rapid enough to create more jobs than required for new entrants into the labor force.
At the very least, the huge number (roughly 22 million) of those who want a full-time job and have been unable to find one should fall.
A disproportionate share of the jobs now being created are low-paying – so much so that median incomes (those in the middle) continue to decline.
For most Americans, there is no recovery, with 95% of the gains going to the top 1%.
Even before the recession, American-style capitalism was not working for a large share of the population.
Median income (adjusted for inflation) is still lower than it was in 1989, almost a quarter-century ago; and median income for males is lower than it was four decades ago.
America’s new problem is long-term unemployment, which affects nearly 40% of those without jobs, compounded by one of the poorest unemployment-insurance systems among advanced countries, with benefits normally expiring after 26 weeks.
During downturns, the US Congress extends these benefits, recognizing that individuals are unemployed not because they are not looking for work, but because there are no jobs.
But now congressional Republicans are refusing to adapt the unemployment system to this reality; as Congress went into recess for the holidays, it gave the long-term unemployed the equivalent of a pink slip: as 2014 begins, the roughly 1.3 million Americans who lost their unemployment benefits at the end of December have been left to their own devices.
Meanwhile, a major reason that the US unemployment rate is currently as low as it is, is that so many people have dropped out of the labor force.
Some say that this largely reflects demographics: an increasing share of the working-age population is over 50, and labor-force participation has always been lower among this group than among younger cohorts.
But this simply recasts the problem: the US economy has never been good at retraining workers.
American workers are treated like disposable commodities, tossed aside if and when they cannot keep up with changes in technology and the marketplace.
The difference now is that these workers are no longer a small fraction of the population.
It is the result of bad economic policy and even worse social policy, which waste the country’s most valuable resource – its human talent – and cause immense suffering for affected individuals and their families.
So, with Europe’s Great Malaise continuing in 2014 and the US recovery excluding all but those at the top, count me dismal.
On both sides of the Atlantic, market economies are failing to deliver for most citizens.
MADRID – Too frequently, leaders become hostages, rather than shapers, of their sociopolitical environment.
Too seldom does the world see history-changing steps like Richard Nixon’s trip to China in 1972 or Egyptian President Anwar el-Sadat’s visit to Jerusalem in 1977.
That is why conflicts like that between Cuba and the United States persist for so long.
For more than a half-century, no US president was willing to pay the political price for admitting failure and resuming diplomatic relations with the island.
But, as his tenure enters the home stretch, Barack Obama seems to have been released from such constraints.
President Jimmy Carter’s success in mediating the Israeli-Egyptian peace settlement, and his bold call for a “Palestinian homeland” (making him the first US president to do so), had much to do with him being deaf to Jewish voices and organizations.
Likewise, President George H.W. Bush could not have dragged the recalcitrant Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir to the Madrid Peace Conference in October 1991 had he not been willing to take on what he described as “some powerful political forces” made up of “a thousand lobbyists on the Hill.”
But, with the end of his presidency in view, he finally seems to recognize that securing his legacy requires overcoming not just interest groups, but the structure of interest-group politics in America.
He is now at loggerheads with the Republican congressional majority over his landmark climate-change agreement with China and his controversial amnesty plan for illegal immigrants.
Likewise, if Obama still hopes to be remembered as the redeemer of the two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, he will have to take on the American Israel Public Affairs Committee next.
This would represent a departure from early in his presidency, when, in his bid to broker a settlement, he failed to confront AIPAC.
Perhaps his effort to change America’s Cuba policy – which means challenging the highly disciplined lobby opposing the rule of Fidel Castro and his brother Raúl – will show the way.
In the meantime, normalizing relations with Cuba could have far-reaching benefits.
Throughout Latin America, Cold War-era resentment of America is likely to ease, and its standing may improve in countries like Bolivia, Ecuador, Nicaragua, and especially Venezuela, which has been a Cuban ideological satellite and the Castro regime’s major economic lifeline.
Indeed, it would be unsustainable for Venezuela, nearly bankrupt owing to falling oil prices, to remain on its anti-American course, while the Castro brothers themselves have reconciled with the “gringos.”
Conspicuously, Latin America’s last Marxist insurgent group, the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Columbia (FARC), declared a unilateral cease-fire just hours after the announcement that the US and Cuba would restore diplomatic ties.
Over the last two years, Cuba has hosted peace negotiations between FARC and the Colombian government, with full US support.
As the world’s biggest consumer of illicit drugs supplied by Colombian producers, the US has a vital interest in a peace deal, which could help reduce, if not end, the traffic.
To be sure, though America’s policy toward Cuba has been one of the Cold War’s last vestiges, Obama’s move will not be a game changer in America’s competition with China and Russia to shape the new world order.
But it certainly boosts Obama’s international credibility and improves his prospects of deterring other global rivals.
By maintaining Cold War-era financial subsidies to Cuba, Russia has tried to ensure that the island remained a geopolitical flashpoint, as it was for the Soviet Union.
In fact, even if the US were not attempting to normalize relations, Russia’s current economic woes probably would have doomed its long-standing – and already much-reduced – support for the Castro government.
After all, such changes are best served not by imposing stifling sanctions, or through military “shock and awe” tactics, as in Iraq, but by socioeconomic improvement and diplomatic engagement by external powers.
Indeed, predictions that Cuba might now shift toward a Chinese-style model of political autocracy and economic opening might be accurate only in the short term.
In the longer term, the end of the Castro era, together with improved relations with the US, is likely to bring about a repeat of Spain’s transition toward full-fledged liberal democracy after the fall of Francisco Franco.
In Cuba, Obama has shown that transcending the politics of confrontation and sanctions requires diplomatic initiative.
It is not too late for him to address other longstanding tensions, such as with Iran and North Korea – not to mention the festering conflict between Israel and Palestine – with similar boldness.
And, of course, he should work to mitigate the risk that Russia creates a permanent zone of military tension along its borders with NATO.
History honors those who dare to challenge the politics of inertia by opening, through inspired diplomacy, new paths to progress.
MOSCOW – Can Russia escape the “resource curse” implied by high oil prices, or will it succumb to what we call a “70-80” scenario?
That is the question confronting Russians today, and we fear that their fate will be the latter: if oil prices remain at $70-80 per barrel, Russia is likely to relive key features of the Brezhnev era of the 1970’s and 1980’s – with a stagnating economy and 70-80% approval ratings for its political leaders.
The resource curse means, of course, that Russian elites will prefer to postpone restructuring the economy and modernizing the country’s political and economic institutions.
This will undermine economic performance, making it very unlikely that Russia will catch up with the advanced economies in the next 10-15 years, as officials promise.
Fast and sustainable economic growth requires the rule of law, accountable, meritocratic, and non-corrupt bureaucrats, protection of property rights, contract enforcement, and competitive markets.
In Russia, the task is especially problematic, because the ruling elite’s interests run counter to undertaking it.
In post-crisis Russia, the resource curse is reinforced by two factors.
First, massive renationalization since 2004 has left state-owned companies once again controlling the commanding heights of the economy.
These firms have no interest in developing modern institutions that protect private property and promote the rule of law.
Second, Russia’s high degree of economic inequality sustains the majority’s preference for redistribution rather than private entrepreneurship.
Russia’s leaders acknowledge the need for modernization, and pay it frequent lip-service, as is evidenced by President Dmitri Medvedev’s manifesto “Go, Russia!”
But the incentives to escape the resource trap are weakened by the overwhelming importance of the resource rents to the wider political elite.
When the economy was near collapse during the recent crisis, we thought that the government would recognize the need to push ahead with radical reforms that would eventually lead to a diverse, de-centralized, and fast-growing economy.
But, while stimulus policies were mostly effective in dealing with the immediate crisis, they did not address the long-term issues that impede growth.
Vertical industrial policy, horizontal industrial policy, investment in education – all have been tried in the last ten years.
Yet Russia’s public institutions remain as weak as ever (for example, corruption is as prevalent as it was 10 years ago, if not more so), and the economy is no less dependent on commodity prices.
Today’s economic silver bullet is an “innovation city” in Skolkovo, which the government hopes will spur inflows of modern technology.
A comprehensive and consistent reform plan was already included in then-President Vladimir Putin’s own economic agenda at the beginning of his first term in 2000.
The so-called Gref Program (named after former Minister of the Economy German Gref) foresaw many of the reforms that are vitally needed – privatization, deregulation, accession to the World Trade Organization, and reform of the government, natural monopolies, and social security.
Many of these reforms are outlined in the current government’s own “Long-Term Strategy for 2020.”
The problem is that – as with the Gref program in 2000 – the Strategy is unlikely to be fully implemented, owing to the same old weak incentives.
Even the recently announced privatization of non-controlling stakes in the largest state-owned firms – while timely and laudable – will not create an irreversible commitment to reform.
So far, the government does not want to let control over these firms get into private hands.
Hence, the sales that Prime Minister Putin announced will not increase the demand for pro-market institutions.
In June, during the St. Petersburg Economic Forum, participants in two sessions – Russian government and business leaders, as well as influential foreign players – were asked about the future of Russia’s economy.
In one session, 61% of participants foresaw stagnation in the next 2-5 years (33% predicted growth and 5% expected a crisis).
In the other session, 55% of participants foresaw stagnation in the next ten years (with 41% projecting growth and 4% expecting collapse).
The factors that drove the Putin era of rapid economic growth – high and rising oil prices, cheap labor, and unused production capacity – are all exhausted.
Russia will thus be forced to start spending the reserves that saved the economy in the recent crisis.
The “70-80” scenario will preserve the status quo, but eventually the economy will reach a dead end, at which point the only choice will be genuine economic reform or decline and dangerous civil disorder.
ABU DHABI – No one should die from a preventable disease.
Yet preventable diseases kill two million children every year, many of whom are too poor to afford proper treatment.
The majority of these deaths are either treatable with existing medicines, or avoidable in the first place.
Malaria, a life-threatening disease transmitted by mosquitos, is one of these illnesses.
Less than a century ago, families everywhere – including across North America and Europe – lived in fear of a mosquito bite.
Malaria not only took the lives of children and adults; it perpetuated poverty and limited global economic growth, preventing millions from reaching their full potential.
Today, more than 30 countries have eliminated the malaria parasite, and at least ten more are on track to do so by 2020.
Despite this, malaria remains a leading cause of death for children under five in Sub-Saharan Africa, taking the life of a child every two minutes.
Malaria is also expensive, costing Africa’s economy some $12 billion per year.
Despite many decades of intense research and development efforts, with more than 20 possible vaccines currently being evaluated, there is still no commercially available inoculation against malaria.
However, there are a number of preventive measures that can contribute to reducing the risk of infection.
These include using insecticide-treated bed nets, spraying indoor walls with insecticides, and focusing prophylactic measures on the most vulnerable groups.
Today, we have a window of opportunity to build on what has already been accomplished, by highlighting and supporting initiatives and research efforts that could eradicate malaria.
For example, researchers at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health’s Malaria Research Institute have discovered how resistance to the malaria parasite can spread in a mosquito population.
The findings could pave the way for the development of self-propagating malaria-control strategies, mitigating the need for continuous application of insecticides and reliance on bed nets.
Another important initiative that deserves support is the World Health Organization’s “vector control” guidelines, which offer strategies for controlling the mosquitos, flies, and bugs that transmit disease.
The WHO’s plan provides a new strategy to strengthen vector control worldwide through increased capacity, improved surveillance, better coordination, and integrated action across sectors and diseases.
Global health efforts should support efforts by countries where malaria is endemic to develop and improve vector-control strategies.
We also need to consider how changing global environments are affecting the occurrence of malaria.
For example, because deforestation creates favorable conditions for mosquitos by producing ditches and puddles, which are more likely to pool less acidic water that is conducive to mosquito larvae development, countries with elevated forest loss tend to have higher rates of malaria.
Deforestation also leads to reduced absorption of rainfall, which increases the volume of standing water.
In the United Arab Emirates, we believe that eliminating disease is central to global development.
If people are given the opportunity to lead healthy lives, they can get an education, contribute to the economy, and look after their families, generating a multiplier effect that further boosts prosperity and development.
We also believe in adopting a holistic approach, one that includes securing financial commitments, promoting research and innovation through infrastructure development, and regularly convening global champions to maintain momentum and share ideas.
That is why Sheikh Mohammed bin Zayed, the Abu Dhabi Crown Prince, has contributed $30 million to the Roll Back Malaria partnership, the preeminent global framework for action against malaria.
I am proud to sit on the board of Roll Back Malaria, because I believe that diversity of leadership perspectives is vital to finding solutions to combat the disease, particularly as we begin a bold new chapter in the quest to eliminate it.
The landscape of leaders supporting global health is expanding, and now represents populations around the world.
This is important, because partnerships like Roll Back Malaria must work globally to save the greatest possible number of lives.
We hope to encourage further global collaboration this week, as Abu Dhabi convenes more than 200 leaders in disease eradication at a forum called Reaching the Last Mile.
This meeting aims to share insights and best practices on how to map, control, or eliminate preventable diseases, including innovations that could ultimately bring an end to malaria globally.
In the twentieth century, we managed to eradicate a disease, smallpox, for the first time in history.
Complete eradication, elimination, or control of disease is complex, and that is particularly true of malaria.
A few years ago, we thought that elimination of malaria was beyond our reach, but together the world has made tremendous progress.
Between 2000 and 2015, public-health interventions saved the lives of 6.2 million people, 5.9 million of whom were children under the age of five.
By 2020, an estimated $6.4 billion will be needed each year to fund the global fight to eliminate malaria.This will be a difficult feat, but together we can create a future without the disease – a brighter and more stable future for millions of vulnerable people, with more opportunities for generations to come.
MADRID – Three years ago, the United States and the European Union launched negotiations on the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP), promising to complete them on “one tank of gas.”
But now the talks are running on fumes, with sniping on both sides and the political window for an agreement closing fast.
The obstacles that the TTIP negotiations have run up against are not exclusive to that agreement.
They reflect a broader trend – one that demands a fundamental rethink of the prevailing approach to trade and free-trade agreements.
It is no secret that the backlash against such agreements has been gaining traction in recent years.
In the US, both presumptive nominees for the presidency – the Democrats’ Hillary Clinton and the Republicans’ Donald Trump – have espoused anti-trade views, with Trump projecting a mercantilist approach unseen in mainstream US political debate since before World War II.
Moreover, it looks increasingly unlikely that the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which the US has negotiated with 11 other Pacific Rim countries, will receive congressional support.
French President François Hollande, in particular, has intensified his opposition to the agreement in the run-up to next year’s presidential election.
Support for the agreement has weakened so significantly, in fact, that European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker has called for leaders to reaffirm their commitment to the deal at this month’s European Council.
Driving this trend is the sense that globalization has gone too far, and is now squeezing ordinary citizens, while enriching a select few.
And that sense is not unreasonable; some groups do reap higher rewards from economic liberalization while others suffer.
But the reality is that free trade, guided by international rules and standards, has a net positive macroeconomic impact.
To avoid losing these benefits, much more must be done to recapture public support for growth-enhancing deals like the TTIP.
The key will be to smooth out free trade’s negative impacts and prepare societies better for increasing economic openness.
Placing a high priority on support programs – trade adjustment assistance in the US and the European Globalization Adjustment Fund in the EU – with a focus on groups that are negatively affected by agreements is one obvious imperative.
Given the fundamental challenges to society posed by the free flow of goods, services, and capital – and compounded by rapid technological progress, most immediately in robotics – structural reforms must also be undertaken.
With entire industries coming under threat, workers increasingly face the need to switch careers.
In this context, curricula that have defined education for the last half-century must be rethought, with a view toward ensuring that workers are equipped with higher-level “meta-skills” that can be adapted easily to a broad array of industries.
Given the political pushback, there have been rumblings that US and EU leaders will settle on a narrow TTIP, covering only areas where there has already been agreement.
Such a deal would be a missed opportunity, because the TTIP has the potential to do much more.
Moreover, a TTIP that establishes a joint project in which the EU and the US (with GDPs of $18.5 trillion and $17.5 trillion, respectively) are essentially equal partners could reinvigorate the bilateral relationship.
For Europe, the deal would be even more beneficial, as it would amplify the EU’s voice in global standard setting at a time when it is increasingly being talked over.
A limited agreement would not only fail to bring these benefits; it could actually undercut the weight and influence of the transatlantic community, by signaling weakness and ceding rulemaking to other forums.
Given current political constraints, developing a TTIP with maximum impact will not be easy, and it will require some creative thinking – like that which facilitated the Paris climate agreement last December.
That deal represented a leap forward in how international agreements are made, as it wove together hard rules, non-binding pledges, and overarching frameworks to enable an agreement among 195 countries.
Taking inspiration from this innovative approach, the US and the EU should move on from areas in which they have already agreed on binding standards, and adopt broad principles and frameworks for ongoing negotiations on knottier issues, such as health and food safety.
Such a mechanism is already envisioned in the TTIP, in a proposed chapter on regulatory cooperation, but in an indefinite and limited way.
While an approach that rests more heavily on non-binding cooperation would have a weaker immediate impact, it could be the key to overcoming immediate political hurdles, without giving up on the TTIP’s longer-term potential.
Furthermore, it could help to reinforce America’s place at the forefront of international rulemaking, while propelling Europe back to America’s side.
After three years of negotiating, the TTIP is simply not where it needs to be – and, without public support, it never will be.
Shifting popular opinion will take a lot more than slick messaging; it will require changes in how trade is conducted and how society adjusts to openness and progress.
DAVOS – Could 2013 be a better year for the global economy than 2012 was?
The Fed has signaled that it is prepared to do more to support growth and bring down unemployment.
All that other US policymakers have to do to ensure that 2013 is better than 2012 is avoid shooting themselves in the foot.
In particular, to eliminate the uncertainty that continues to depress consumption and capital spending, they need to avoid “fiscal cliffs” (now and in the future), dangerous sequester mechanisms, and the silliness surrounding the periodic approach of the debt ceiling.
They also must establish a credible plan for medium-term fiscal consolidation – one that entails both higher tax revenues and expenditure reforms, but only once the economy is strong enough to handle such measures.
The consensus forecast for US growth in 2013 is lower than for 2012, which is not a vote of confidence that they can.
Similarly, it should not be hard for Europe to do better in 2013, given how dismally 2012 turned out.
The elements of a banking union, starting with a single supervisor, are beginning to materialize.
The European Central Bank has promised to do more to support the eurozone periphery.
Even the International Monetary Fund believes that the slight eurozone contraction in 2012 will turn into a limited expansion in 2013.
The ECB could keep interest rates stubbornly high and fail to reach the agreements with peripheral governments that are needed so that it can buy their bonds on the secondary market.
The Chinese economy remains heavily dependent on exports, which should pick up as growth in other countries recovers.
The danger is that the Chinese authorities will continue to do too little to rebalance their economy, allowing vulnerabilities to build up.
When export growth softened in mid-2012, they halted the appreciation of the renminbi and rolled out additional costly capital projects like the high-speed rail line – the world’s longest – that was recently completed.
The problem is that growth based on low wages, supported by an artificially competitive exchange rate, cannot continue for much longer.
Yet, heedless of the dangers, powerful export interests and regional governments continue to fight for these policies.
The common element is that while the pieces are in place for faster growth in the three largest economies – the US, the eurozone, and China – politics may prevent it from materializing.
Specifically, the US needs to address the problem of so-called “super PACs,” political action committees that allow rich special interests and individuals to buy elections.
It needs to develop news media that neither channel only one position nor treat all points of view, no matter how absurd, as equally valid.
When the American public is provided with careful analysis of issues related to gun violence and climate change, for example, we can be confident that it will also be getting reasonable economic analysis.
Europe, for its part, needs political reform at the level of the European Union.
It must strengthen the European Parliament’s powers so that the EU has a political counterweight to its increasingly powerful economic entities – not just the ECB and the single banking supervisor, but also the European Commission, which will eventually become the enforcer of fiscal discipline.
If stronger EU-level economic institutions are to work properly, stronger EU-level political institutions will be needed to hold them accountable and give citizens voice.
And, in China, greater transparency is needed to control corruption and keep special interests in their place.
Chinese policymakers talk the talk, but they have yet to walk the walk.
Japan is the one place where the political system has delivered change that bodes well for faster growth.
This is ironic, given that the country’s political system has long been regarded as dysfunctional.
But Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, in his second time around leading the government, promises to force the Bank of Japan finally to end deflation, and that the public sector generally will do more to support economic growth.
We actually may be seeing a politician capable of learning from his mistakes and an electorate prepared to reward him for doing so – in the country least likely to witness such a breakthrough.
If that is indeed what plays out in Japan, the world will gain a beacon of hope.
At midnight on August 15, 1947, a new nation was born on a subcontinent ripped apart by a bloody partition.
Independent India came into being as flames blazed across the land, corpse-laden trains crossed the new frontier with Pakistan, and weary refugees abandoned everything to seek a new life.
A less propitious start for a fledgling nation could scarcely be imagined.
Yet, six decades later, the India that emerged from the wreckage of the British Raj is the world’s largest democracy, poised after years of rapid economic growth to take its place as one of the giants of the twenty-first century.
A country whose very survival seemed in doubt at its founding offers striking lessons in constructing, against all odds, a working democracy.
No other country embraces such an extraordinary profusion of ethnic groups, mutually incomprehensible languages, religions, and cultural practices, as well as variations of topography, climate, and levels of economic development.
In 1947, India’s leaders faced a country with a million dead, 13 million displaced, billions of rupees worth of property damage, and the wounds of sectarian violence still bleeding.
Given this, and the challenges of administering a new country, integrating the “princely states” into the Indian Union, and reorganizing the divided armed forces, they could have been forgiven for demanding dictatorial powers.
To the American motto, “E Pluribus Unum,” India could only counter, “E Pluribus Pluribum.”
Instead of suppressing its diversity in the name of national unity, India acknowledged its pluralism in its institutional arrangements: all groups, faiths, tastes, and ideologies survive and contend for their place in the sun.
India suffered caste conflicts, clashes over the rights of different linguistic groups, religious riots (mainly between Hindus and Muslims), and separatist threats.
Despite many stresses and strains, India has a remained a freewheeling multi-party democracy – corrupt and inefficient, perhaps, but nonetheless flourishing.
It helped that India’s founding fathers, from Mahatma Gandhi on, were convinced democrats.
India’s first and longest-serving prime minister, Jawaharlal Nehru, spent his political career instilling in his people the habits of democracy: disdain for dictators, respect for parliamentary procedures, and abiding faith in the constitutional system.
As prime minister, Nehru carefully nurtured the country’s infant democratic institutions by showing them respect, even deference.
For example, on the one occasion that he publicly criticized a judge, he apologized the next day and wrote an abject letter to the India’s Chief Justice.
Though there was no serious challenger to his authority, Nehru never forgot that he derived his power from India’s people, to whom he remained astonishingly accessible.
By his personal example, democratic values became so entrenched that when his own daughter, Indira Gandhi, suspended India’s freedoms in 1975 with a 21-month State of Emergency, she felt compelled to return to the Indian people for vindication.
Having imbibed the most important of her father’s values, she held a free election, which she overwhelmingly lost.
Though Indian politics is hardly immune to the appeal of sectarianism, its people have come to accept the idea of India as one land embracing many differences of caste, creed, color, culture, cuisine, conviction, costume, and custom, yet still rallying around a democratic consensus.
The heart of that consensus is the simple principle that you don’t need to agree all the time – except on the ground rules about how you can disagree.
India has survived all the challenges that have beset it for 60 years because it has maintained a consensus on how to manage without consensus.
For example, India permits all religions to flourish while ensuring that none is privileged by the state.
This includes the granting of group rights, under which Muslims are governed by their own Personal Law, distinct from the common civil code.
If America is a melting-pot, then India is a thali , a selection of sumptuous dishes in different bowls.
Each tastes different, and does not necessarily mix with the next, but all belong on the same plate.
Separatist movements in far-flung places like Tamil Nadu and Mizoram have been quietly defused by a simple formula: yesterday’s secessionists become today’s chief ministers (the equivalent of provincial or state governors) and tomorrow’s opposition leaders.
Moreover, democracy in India is not an elite preoccupation, but matters most to the underprivileged masses.
Whereas in the United States, a majority of the poor do not vote, – turnout in Harlem was 23% in the last presidential election – in India the poor turn out in great numbers.
As a result, the explosive potential of caste division also has been channeled through the ballot box, with the lowest of the low attaining high office.
Mayawati, an “untouchable” woman, has ruled India’s most populous state, Uttar Pradesh, as Chief Minister three times, and now enjoys a secure majority.
More generally, the logic of the electoral marketplace means that no single communal identity can dominate others.
Three years ago, India, a country that is 81% Hindu, saw a Roman Catholic political leader (Sonia Gandhi) make way for a Sikh (Manmohan Singh), who was sworn in by a Muslim (President Abdul Kalam).
By contrast, the world’s oldest democracy, the US, has yet to elect a president who is not white, male, and Christian.
Democracy has sustained an India that safeguards the common space available to each identity.
That idea has knit together a country that many thought would not survive, and whose 60th birthday is therefore well worth celebrating.
OXFORD – Emerging markets – Brazil, China, India, Indonesia, Mexico, Russia, Turkey, and some 15 other countries in Africa, Asia, Europe, and Latin America – account for a rapidly growing share of the world’s population and economy.
But their governments now face one of the major challenges of the twenty-first century: creating public-health solutions that match the speed and scale of urbanization.
The four largest emerging markets account for more than 40% of the world’s population and have a collective GDP of nearly $9 trillion.
It is expected that their economies will overtake those of the G-7 by 2030, and that, by 2050, Brazil, China, India, Mexico, and Russia will, with the US, be the worlds’ dominant economies.
Today, however, these countries’ cities must contend with economic and social issues that are more acute, more urgent, and of a vastly larger scale than those that confronted European and American cities in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries.
In my own country, Pakistan, Karachi is growing at a rate of 1,000 people per day.
Massive migration to urban areas, high unemployment, low incomes, poor housing and sanitation, inadequate infrastructure, and social deprivation are shared symptoms of economic hubs where population growth has not been reconciled with cohesive approaches to public-health policy.
As government, business, and academic leaders agreed at a recent meeting held under the auspices of the Emerging Markets Symposium, the promise of emerging-market countries will not be realized if their cities, and consequently their economies, are sick.
A seminal 1995 report on human development by my compatriot, Mahbub ul Haq, stressed the differences between human security viewed as personal security and viewed as national security.
He used human-development indicators rather than aggregate national indicators to measure economic and social progress.
Nothing is more fundamental to human security than health, which permits human choice, enables human freedom, and underpins human development.
But health is also about wellness, the security of life, and the capacity to work and learn.
As the economist and philosopher Amartya Sen has put it, “health is a precondition for functional effectiveness across a whole range of human activities.”
Even as the disease burden in emerging-market cities shifts from infectious to chronic illnesses, urban populations remain vulnerable to epidemic disease, childhood diseases born of malnutrition, HIV/AIDS, malaria, tuberculosis, and mental disorders rooted in unemployment and poverty.
They are also vulnerable to death and injury from natural disasters and traffic accidents – and to the health consequences of social disorder and breakdown.
The speed of urban growth and the resulting concentration of poverty have overwhelmed the capacity of some national and municipal governments to provide services – sustainable and affordable housing, clean water and sanitation, and education – essential to urban public health.
But the concentration of people and economic activity in emerging-market cities and megacities does offer invaluable opportunities of scale for building health-related infrastructure and delivering health-care services.
Emerging-market governments must address critical issues arising from weak coordination within, and between, national and municipal governments on health and health-care policies and programs.
They should consider reforms that include giving city governments the authority, resources, and responsibility that they need to address health and health-care outcomes.
Anticipatory city planning, based on realistic demographic forecasts, patient registers, and health-information systems, as well as participation in urban health-knowledge networks, needs to be implemented.
Proven systems and reforms should be shared between emerging-market cities, and successful new innovations and ideas should be adapted to local conditions.
This includes new and affordable technologies, such as low-cost mobile telephony for use by community-health workers.
In Pakistan, for example, there are 60 million mobile phone subscribers in a population of 160 million.
Mobile telephones can help deliver affordable urban health care by serving as diagnostic tools for taking pictures, and by their usefulness for writing prescriptions and monitoring the condition of patients in low-income areas.
Weeks into the crisis triggered by Iran’s illegal capture of 15 British naval personnel, the European Union’s irresolute and contradictory approach is making matters worse.
Faced with a country whose leader is bent on acquiring nuclear weapons, the EU’s leaders are simply dithering, fearing that the fire next door in Iraq could somehow spread.
The latest crisis proves again that Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad cannot be trusted.
Following the ambush of the UK forces, the Iranian authorities dissembled as to their exact location at the time of their abduction, which was subsequently proven by the UK government to have been in Iraqi territorial waters operating under the authority of UN resolutions and with the express consent of the Iraqi government.
What Ahmedinejad appears to want are bargaining chips to secure the release of 6 Iranians who were aiding the Iraqi insurgency before being captured by the US.
The EU’s reluctance to match America’s robust language on Iran is emboldening him.
Ahmedinejad can sense an international community divided, and like his fellow pariah leader, North Korea’s Kim Jong-il, he is exploiting that division at every opportunity.
The uniquely dangerous combination of a nuclear Iran, which seeks to inspire the Shia in the Gulf states to rise up against their Sunni masters, coupled with Ahmedinejad’s millenarian mysticism, poses an existential threat to Israel, which Ahmadinejad has threatened to “wipe off the map.”
And, if Iran succeeds in acquiring long-range ballistic missiles, the security threat will become global.
Indeed, the established concept of nuclear deterrence through “mutual assured destruction” (MAD), which kept the peace between the Soviet Union and NATO, may not apply with a ruler like Ahmadinejad, who believes in the sacred merits of martyrdom.
MAD simply won’t work for a mad man who is guided by quasi-messianic certitude.
Those who believe that Ahmedinejad is a bluffer and a buffoon who would pull back from the brink may be fundamentally misreading his psychology.
It is past time for Europe’s leaders to grasp the reality of the situation.
The possibility of degrading Iran’s nuclear weapons program through military action cannot be totally discounted, although it should of course be the last option and would be immensely risky even if militarily possible.
Yet there is much more that EU leaders can do to undermine the regime economically.
The EU’s trade significance for Iran is huge, accounting for 40% of Iran’s imports and a quarter of its exports.
Some two-thirds of Iranian industry, most of it state controlled, relies on German engineering exports, 65% of which in 2005 came with export credit insurance guarantees from the German government.
Likewise, the European Investment Bank is providing $1billion to finance the construction of the Nabucco oil pipeline from Iran to Austria.
If completed, the Nabucco pipeline will make Iran an indispensable EU energy partner.
As an organ of the EU, the EIB should be pursuing an ethical investment policy.
This is difficult to reconcile with lending to a country like Iran, which publicly executes individuals for sexual “deviance,” imprisons women who protest peacefully, and silences journalists who are critical of the regime.
The EU needs to tell Iran that unless it releases the British hostages and moderates its nuclear ambitions, it will receive no export guarantees.
Such a policy would stop trade between Iran and the EU in its tracks, and Ahmadinejad knows it.
There are already signs of disquiet among more moderate Iranian policymakers, as Ahmadinejad’s economic mismanagement has begun to fuel higher inflation.
A cut in export guarantees would put the Iranian economy – and Ahmedinejad – in real jeopardy.
Individual companies, mindful of US sanctions on those who do business with the regime, can also help.
For example, British Petroleum (BP), to its credit, has disinvested from Iran on ethical grounds, an example that other European firms should follow.
The Iranian government’s contempt for the international community reflects its contempt for human rights and civilized norms.
The Ahmadinejad government’s popularity has plummeted, as evidenced by recent local election results.
Europe’s political leaders need to recognize that now is the time to facilitate change in Iran by suspending export credit guarantees, stopping EIB financing, and speaking with a united voice.
MOSCOW – Prime Minister Vladimir Putin insists that “Without normal democratic development Russia will have no future.”
We Russians are pleased to hear these enlightened words, yet Putin adds a “but” to his argument, which weakens it considerably.
We have hated this “but,” this coordinating conjunction, ever since the dawn of the Soviet era.
Then we were told that freedom is good, but that one can’t live in an individualist society without common concern for the communist state.
Now Russia’s prime minister tells us that democracy is indeed great, but that public protests cannot take place in public places, say, around hospitals and the like.
Never mind that the Russian constitution does not list hospitals among places forbidden for public assembly, or that sick people need democracy, too.
Russian President Dmitri Medvedev does understand – with no “buts” – that “freedom is better than not freedom,” that “legal nihilism” is bad and democracy is good.
He understands that Stalin was a criminal, that his order to murder Polish officers in Katyn was an act of depravity that has no excuse or explanation.
The president understands this; unfortunately, we don’t understand the role our president plays in our society.
He says all the right things, yet they don’t seem to be reflected in reality.
The Dissenters Marches, which take place on the 31st of every month (article 31 of the Russian constitution guarantees freedom of assembly), could be (and are) easily dismissed as a marginal protest of a few hundred people with no common goals or ideas.
Putin’s and Medvedev’s poll numbers are so high, many argue, that they don’t need to care about a few dissenters.
Besides, most Russians support the government with no dissent at all, they say.
This doesn't say much, however, because the Russian majority always supports the government, regardless of the policies it implements.
Today’s dissenters are indeed a minority and of course can be disregarded, but only up to a point.
After all, this minority is one of thinkers – musicians, artists, and writers, and those who move forward Russian science, technology, and economic innovation.
Such people cannot be dismissed as useless, since we need the innovation that they deliver, even if we think Russia doesn’t need democracy.
True, not all members of the thinking minority attend the dissenters’ marches, yet many more of them silently oppose the regime.
Our leaders talk obsessively of Russia’s industrial modernization, of their support for innovations such as nanotechnology, so that Russia can catch up with the developed counties.
In line with Soviet traditions, a nanotechnology project was given a piece of land, with plans to set up various scientific facilities.
The best brains in Russia –engineers, scientists, and inventors – will gather in one place, and from there begin moving the country forward.
The hope is that not only those living in Russia but also emigrants will be overcome with patriotic feelings.
They will come back to Russia (also drawn by high salaries) to make themselves famous and their motherland proud.
Now he is asked to come home: your motherland is waiting for you, it values your contribution, it forgives your betrayal, and it will pay you more than what you are getting elsewhere.
He is of course nostalgic for the birch trees, his old friends, ex-wife, and children from the first marriage.
He wants to come back, to revisit all that he has left behind, in the meantime helping his nation to become economically strong, technically advanced, and prosperous.
Yet, before making the final decision, he turns on the radio, watches a bit of TV, browses the Internet, and finds out what Russia is like.
Journalists are killed, scientists are accused of espionage, and Mikhail Khodorkovsky remains unjustly imprisoned.
Various blogs tell him that Russia’s parliament is just a place for rubber-stamping decisions already taken at the top.
He reads the confused and confusing speeches our leaders: freedom is good, but…
This brilliant scientist learns that Vasily Aleksanyan, the terminally ill Yukos lawyer, was held in prison in inhuman conditions.
Another lawyer, Sergei Magnitsky, died in prison after being refused medical treatment.
And yet another one, Stanislav Markelov, was gunned down on a Moscow street.
Then this scientist will be surprised (or not) to discover that the Russian majority views Joseph Stalin as the third most popular person in a contest to be known as the “Face of Russia.”
In the meantime, his junior colleague in Russia, who still has his whole future in front of him, does not attend the Dissenters’ March, but simply emigrates, which is also a form of protest.
In Soviet times, communist leaders tried to lure people into the kolkhozes (collective farms) with promises of great crops and spectacular meat production.
Nothing worked, because the kolkhoz system was incompatible with high achievement in the long run.
Similarly, in a country where the concepts of democracy and freedom are balanced by “but,” achievements in science, technology, and economy are not possible.
The thinking minority needs a system of laws and institutions, real presidential elections, a working parliament, and justice that is independent, rather than merely following orders from above.
PRINCETON – Last month, AlphaGo, a computer program specially designed to play the game Go, caused shockwaves among aficionados when it defeated Lee Sidol, one of the world’s top-ranked professional players, winning a five-game tournament by a score of 4-1.
Twenty years have passed since the IBM computer Deep Blue defeated world chess champion Garry Kasparov, and we all know computers have improved since then.
But Deep Blue won through sheer computing power, using its ability to calculate the outcomes of more moves to a deeper level than even a world champion can.
Go is played on a far larger board (19 by 19 squares, compared to 8x8 for chess) and has more possible moves than there are atoms in the universe, so raw computing power was unlikely to beat a human with a strong intuitive sense of the best moves.
Instead, AlphaGo was designed to win by playing a huge number of games against other programs and adopting the strategies that proved successful.
You could say that AlphaGo evolved to be the best Go player in the world, achieving in only two years what natural selection took millions of years to accomplish.
Eric Schmidt, executive chairman of Google’s parent company, the owner of AlphaGo, is enthusiastic about what artificial intelligence (AI) means for humanity.
Speaking before the match between Lee and AlphaGo, he said that humanity would be the winner, whatever the outcome, because advances in AI will make every human being smarter, more capable, and “just better human beings.”
Around the same time as AlphaGo’s triumph, Microsoft’s “chatbot” – software named Taylor that was designed to respond to messages from people aged 18-24 – was having a chastening experience.
“Tay” as she called herself, was supposed to be able to learn from the messages she received and gradually improve her ability to conduct engaging conversations.
Unfortunately, within 24 hours, people were teaching Tay racist and sexist ideas.
When she starting saying positive things about Hitler, Microsoft turned her off and deleted her most offensive messages.
I do not know whether the people who turned Tay into a racist were themselves racists, or just thought it would be fun to undermine Microsoft’s new toy.
Either way, the juxtaposition of AlphaGo’s victory and Taylor’s defeat serves as a warning.
It is one thing to unleash AI in the context of a game with specific rules and a clear goal; it is something very different to release AI into the real world, where the unpredictability of the environment may reveal a software error that has disastrous consequences.
Nick Bostrom, the director of the Future of Humanity Institute at Oxford University, argues in his book Superintelligence that it will not always be as easy to turn off an intelligent machine as it was to turn off Tay.
He defines superintelligence as an intellect that is “smarter than the best human brains in practically every field, including scientific creativity, general wisdom, and social skills.”
Such a system may be able to outsmart our attempts to turn it off.
Bostrom, together with Vincent Müller, asked AI experts to indicate dates corresponding to when there is a one in two chance of machines achieving human-level intelligence and when there is a nine in ten chance.
The median estimates for the one in two chance were in the 2040-2050 range, and 2075 for the nine in ten chance.
Most experts expected that AI would achieve superintelligence within 30 years of achieving human- level intelligence.
The overall response rate was only 31%, and researchers working in AI have an incentive to boost the importance of their field by trumpeting its potential to produce momentous results.
The prospect of AI achieving superintelligence may seem too distant to worry about, especially given more pressing problems.
But there is a case to be made for starting to think about how we can design AI to take into account the interests of humans, and indeed of all sentient beings (including machines, if they are also conscious beings with interests of their own).
With driverless cars already on California roads, it is not too soon to ask whether we can program a machine to act ethically.
As such cars improve, they will save lives, because they will make fewer mistakes than human drivers do.
Should they be programmed to swerve to avoid hitting a child running across the road, even if that will put their passengers at risk?
What if the only risk is damage to the car itself, not to the passengers?
Perhaps there will be lessons to learn as such discussions about driverless cars get started.
Teaching ethics to a machine that is more intelligent than we are, in a wide range of fields, is a far more daunting task.
Bostrom begins Superintelligence with a fable about sparrows who think it would be great to train an owl to help them build their nests and care for their young.
One sparrow objects that they should first think about how to tame the owl; but the others are impatient to get the exciting new project underway.
They will take on the challenge of training the owl (for example, not to eat sparrows) when they have successfully raised one.
If we want to make an owl that is wise, and not only intelligent, let’s not be like those impatient sparrows.
The constitutional process now under way in Iraq represents a hopeful milestone for all Iraqis.
After decades of successively imposed constitutions, an elected assembly has overseen the process of drafting a new permanent constitution, and the draft text will be voted on by ordinary Iraqis on October 15.
Much of the current talk about the draft’s various provisions thus misses the point.
Regardless of whether the referendum succeeds or fails, and regardless of the details of the constitutional text, what is most important is the establishment of constitutional processes and institutions in Iraq, before and after the referendum.
Concerning the pre-referendum phase, the National Assembly largely succeeded in this task.
Although Iraq’s interim constitution gave the Assembly exclusive control over the drafting process, the Assembly wisely reached out beyond its membership in creating a constitutional drafting committee.
Iraqi leaders were well aware of the decreased participation in the election by a significant portion of Iraq’s multi-ethnic and multi-confessional mosaic, particularly the Sunni community.
Accordingly, they sought out those who were under-represented in the Assembly, but whose sense of participation in and ownership of the process was essential, not merely to the constitutional exercise, but to binding the nation’s wounds.
Reaching out was an important component of establishing the rule of law, and it also sent a message that Iraq had truly turned a corner – that no single party sought to dominate Iraq.
This was an important signal that those elected to the National Assembly understood that democracy does not mean merely the will of the majority.
Instead, all Iraqis were allowed to participate in the process, and, though consensus was not ultimately reached, that, too, was a part of the democratization process.
In the end, Iraq’s voters will decide whether this is a constitution under which they wish to be governed for the foreseeable future.
Those who chose not to participate in last January’s elections will most certainly do so now, both in the referendum and in the upcoming elections to a new Assembly in December.
A second important feature of the drafting process was the extent to which the National Assembly complied with the requirements of Iraq’s interim constitution, the Transitional Administrative Law (TAL).
At the time of the transfer of authority in June of 2004, many pundits predicted that an elected National Assembly would ignore an interim constitution drafted by an unelected Governing Council and promulgated by an occupying authority.
The TAL set a rigorous schedule for the Assembly to complete an initial constitutional draft, and the Assembly essentially abided by those limits.
The deadline extension that it passed was in keeping with both the spirit and the letter of the TAL.
At long last, it can be said that an Iraqi legislature understood that it was constrained by constitutional principals and the rule of law.
The test for institution building, however, will come once a constitution has been approved and a new government installed.
Regardless of who wins the elections, there will be temptations to tinker with the constitutional text.
However, given the little weight given to constitutions in Iraq’s modern history, it is likely that the political class will leave the text alone.
Barring some compelling need, the calculus might well arise that it is more important to abide by the constitution for some time – and to be seen to be abiding by it – than it is even to improve its provisions.
It goes without saying that it will be essential to establish that governance in Iraq is institutional, not personal.
The American administration was absolutely right to resist the call to turn Iraq over to a caudillo, as some wanted.
Iraq’s salvation from the nightmare that it endured over the previous 35 years lies not in any one man; indeed, reliance on “one man” was the central ingredient in Saddamist rule.
The Iraqi Governing Council was not dominated by any single member, and Iraq’s subsequent governments have also operated collegially.
Giving life to constitutionally defined political institutions is far more important to the course of Iraq’s immediate future than the specific provisions that the constitution contains.
That has been the missing ingredient, not only in Iraq, but also in other countries ruled by despots.
Constitutions frequently enshrine lofty principals, and nobly assure protection of fundamental rights.
If the immediate past is a guide, one has reason for optimism in Iraq.
AACHEN – With the decision to withdraw from the Iran nuclear agreement – formally known as the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) – US President Donald Trump’s administration has demonstrated, yet again, that it is determined to destroy major global structures and agreements.
The decision will be a massive blow to the 2015 deal, putting the entire world at risk.
The JCPOA – the result of years of difficult negotiations – was agreed by seven countries and the European Union, and unanimously endorsed by the United Nations Security Council.
Yet Trump has decided unilaterally to impose “the highest level of economic sanction” on Iran and on “any nation that helps Iran in its quest for nuclear weapons.”
Now, companies and banks from countries that have lived up to their commitments under the JCPOA stand to suffer considerably, as a result of their legitimate business ties with Iran.
In other words, the country that is breaking its promises has decided to punish those that have kept theirs.
All of the other parties to the agreement have already reaffirmed their commitment to it.
But the EU, in particular, must step up to take responsibility for ensuring that the JCPOA survives.
While transatlantic relations are a high priority, so is defending multilateralism – and all of its milestones – from reckless and unjustifiable attacks.
This is all the more true when those attacks aim not to put “America First,” but to put Trump first.
Trump’s withdrawal from the JCPOA has come at a particularly sensitive moment for international relations.
For one thing, nuclear proliferation remains at the top of the agenda on the Korean Peninsula.
While some positive steps have lately been taken, the Trump administration, with its incoherent policy approach, may yet squander this opportunity.
South Korean President Moon Jae-in recently met with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un to discuss a formal peace agreement to end the Korean War.
The Moon-Kim meeting was a prelude to another extraordinary summit, between Kim and Trump, which will take place on June 12.
The first-ever meeting between a North Korean leader and a sitting US president reflects the significant progress that has been made in the space of just a few months.
Lest we forget, 2018 began with Kim and Trump exchanging threats for the umpteenth time, and with Trump going so far as to boast about the size of his “nuclear button.”
Since then, however, the US has relied on diplomacy rather than bombast in handling the North Korean nuclear threat – an approach that has enabled recent progress.
And yet, just as newly confirmed US Secretary of State Mike Pompeo was flying to North Korea to meet Kim for a second time, Trump reverted to his antagonistic modus operandi with regard to Iran.
Negotiating with Kim was always going to be extremely challenging, especially given that North Korea, unlike Iran, already possesses nuclear weapons.
With America’s diplomatic credibility now undermined by Trump’s violation of the JCPOA, that job will be all the more difficult.
Trump tends to express himself in terms of national interests, sovereignty, military capacities, and economic supremacy.
Rather, it is in keeping with his systematic rejection of all policies associated with his predecessor, President Barack Obama.
Beyond that, his JCPOA withdrawal is meant to please Trump’s two favorite allies in the Middle East: Saudi Arabia and Israel – the first two countries he visited as president.
Indeed, when Mohammed bin Salman, Saudi Arabia’s crown prince, visited the White House in March, Trump quickly dispensed with the thorny question of the Saudi-led war in Yemen by denouncing Iranian support for the Houthi rebels.
Rather than take the diplomatic initiative to end the fighting and restore stability in Yemen, the Trump administration has continued to fan the flames of an ongoing Saudi-Iranian proxy war that is causing untold suffering and roiling the region.
Similarly, next week the US will move its embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem.
Trump’s announcement of the move in December already generated great unease in the Muslim world (though Iran’s protests were more aggressive than Saudi Arabia’s).
The fact that the embassy will be opened precisely on the 70th anniversary of Israel’s declaration of independence will only intensify the controversy.
On the following day, Palestinians will mark the Nakba (“catastrophe”), commemorating the mass displacement of the Palestinian population that resulted from the establishment of the State of Israel.
To be sure, the US’s alliances with Saudi Arabia and Israel are not new.
But Trump has abandoned the previous administration’s more moderate approach, and thus risks opening a Pandora’s box in the Middle East.
Hawks in both countries are now emboldened, as evidenced by Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s eccentric attempt to discredit the JCPOA.
The same holds true for Iran, where Trump’s withdrawal from the JCPOA plays directly into the hands of hardliners.
The current state of affairs does not bode well for the situation in Syria, where all of the region’s powers have a stake.
Israeli and Iranian forces have already clashed in southern Syria, and Netanyahu’s government is now threatening further action in response to reports that Russia may furnish Syrian President Bashar al-Assad with S-300 anti-aircraft missiles.
Trump’s abrogation of the JCPOA will almost certainly fuel the downward spiral of confrontation in the Middle East, while further complicating matters on the Korean Peninsula.
More broadly, Trump’s decision could have serious implications for global nuclear nonproliferation efforts, which now face the prospect of backsliding.
As Europe’s leaders gather in Portugal to put the finishing touches on the new, slimmed down, Reform Treaty, it might be helpful if they all pretended that the last 50 years of European integration had never taken place.
Let’s then imagine what Europe needs to do to confront its most pressing challenges, especially if it were able to do so without the political constraints of 50 years of EU deal-making and ramshackle institution-building.
On top of that, let us make a major leap of imagination and suppose that even though this scenario of the EU at “Year Zero” means we would not have a half-century of intra-European cooperation to draw on, the nations that today make up the EU would nevertheless be keen to adopt far-reaching joint policies.
Let’s suspend our disbelief, then, and try to imagine what Europe could and should be doing to tackle some of the most far-reaching and obstinate policy challenges that will determine whether the next 50 years are as constructive as the last.
Or, to put it another way, let’s look at our problems in the light of the EU’s existing mechanisms and its potential for creating far-reaching new policies, and then let’s ask ourselves why the EU isn’t realizing its own potential and delivering the goods.
Broadly, we see three areas in which Europe’s policymakers at both the national and EU levels can do better: global challenges where Europe could show greater leadership, the creation and strengthening of human capital within the EU and worldwide, and improvement in the effectiveness of the EU’s own political machinery.
It needs to build substantially on its leadership on climate change by adopting much tougher EU goals, and then use its international economic and trade clout to champion new global emissions standards that scientific opinion can accept as meaningful.
On conflict and security issues, Europe should be advancing to a new phase in which it takes much clearer and unambiguous positions on issues ranging from nuclear proliferation to sanctions against Burma’s military regime.
The purpose must be to establish Europe as a forceful and fair-minded player on the world stage, rather than as a “broad church” in which different viewpoints co-exist.
The aim should be that “soft power” instruments like EU development aid and economic partnerships would be linked with a growing sense of political and security outreach to ensure Europe is a global player to be reckoned with.
That means, of course, that the EU should seek to widen its transatlantic thinking so that the EU and the United States cooperate more closely on defining – and thus protecting – their common interests in a world where together they account for little more than 10% of the total population.
These points are far from a blanket criticism of the EU’s efforts to create a common foreign and security policy.
But they are intended to underline what many people in Europe know very well, which is that the speed with which problems concerning international development and conflict are growing easily outpaces the EU’s policy responses so far.
Building more human capital in Europe and worldwide is a crucially important element in future EU activities.
Education is by far the most profitable investment Europe can make, so it should be launching its most ambitious strategy ever to create a new knowledge dynamic and employment inside the EU while helping to expand greatly education in the world’s poorest countries.
Europe also must at last grasp the nettle of immigration policy – something that has persistently eluded generations of political leaders.
Agreed EU-wide immigration rules are needed to reconcile shrinking Europe’s hunger for imported labor with widespread fears of cultural tensions and social unrest.
It won’t be easy to create a fairer and more multi-cultural Europe, but failure to address this problem openly will carry an even heavier price.
By much the same token, Europe’s governments should be making a determined new effort to strengthen Europeans’ sense of a shared history and common values.
A stronger European identity is the soundest basis for creating the more multi-cultural society that demographers regard as inevitable.
Meanwhile, doubts still surround the political and institutional machinery the EU will need to realize these and other ambitious goals.
Sighs of relief greeted EU leaders’ mid-year agreement on a Reform Treaty aimed at overhauling the Union’s decision-making mechanisms, but it is still uncertain whether the new pact will survive the ratification process in 27 countries.
We believe, though, that the increased use of qualified majority voting by member governments embodied in the new treaty should also be applied to the ratification process itself.
That way, if a small minority of EU governments prove unable to ratify the treaty, it would not be torpedoed the way that its predecessor, the Constitutional Treaty, was in 2005.
CAMBRIDGE – As the Greek crisis evolves, it is important to understand that a successful structural-adjustment program requires strong country ownership.
Even if negotiators overcome the most recent sticking points, it will be difficult to trust in their implementation if the Greek people remain unconvinced.
And without structural reform, there is little chance that the Greek economy will see sustained stability and growth – not least because official lenders are unwilling to continue extending an unreformed Greece significantly more money than it is asked to pay.
(This has been the case through most of the crisis, even if one would never know it from the world press coverage.)
Greece’s membership in the European Union gives its creditors significant leverage, but evidently not enough to change the fundamental calculus.
Greece remains very much a sovereign country, not a sub-sovereign state.
The “troika” of creditors – the International Monetary Fund, the European Central Bank, and the European Commission – simply do not enjoy the kind of leverage over Greece that, say, the Municipal Assistance Corporation wielded over New York City when it teetered on the edge of bankruptcy in the mid-1970s.
The best structural-adjustment programs are those in which the debtor country’s government proposes the policy changes, and the IMF helps design a bespoke program and provides the political cover for its implementation.
So, for reforms to take hold, the Greek government and its electorate must believe in them.
That a country must take ownership of its reform program is not a new lesson.
The IMF’s rocky relationship with Ukraine began long before the latest round of negotiations.
Back in 2013, IMF staff wrote a sobering report on the organization’s experience in the country.
Their conclusion, in essence, was that the government’s failure to embrace the reform process fully all but guaranteed that its program would not work.
If a government is incapable of or uninterested in making the needed adjustments, the report argued, the best option is to drip money out as reforms are implemented, as is now being done in Greece.
Structural-reform conditions often tilt the balance between competing domestic factions, for better or for worse.
If there is no will inside the country to maintain the reforms, they will quickly be undermined.
Left-wing ideologues have long viewed structural-reform programs with deep suspicion, accusing international lenders like the IMF and the World Bank of being captured by neoliberal market fundamentalists.
But one should not make the mistake of viewing these interventions in black-and-white terms.
Breaking down dual labor markets that are excluding young workers (as they do in much of southern Europe, including Italy and, to some extent, France) is very different from making it easier to fire all workers.
Making tax systems simpler and fairer is not the same as raising all taxes.
Recently, opponents of structural reform have put forward more exotic objections – most notably the problem caused by deflation when policy interest rates are at zero.
If structural reforms simply lower all wages and prices, it may indeed be difficult in the short-term to counter the drop in aggregate demand.
But a similar critique could be made of any other change in policy: if it is poorly designed, it will be counter-productive.
If a debt bailout program requires a wholesale change in a country’s economic, social, and political model, the best course of action might be to write off the private losses, rather than pour in public money to cover them.
In cases like Greece, the creditors’ passion for structural reforms might be better directed at home – particularly toward improving financial regulation.
In an ideal world, offering financial aid in exchange for reforms might help those in the country who want to shape it into a modern European state.
But given the difficulty Greece has had so far in making the necessary changes to reach that goal, it might be time to reconsider this approach to the crisis completely.
In place of a program providing the country with further loans, it might make more sense to provide outright humanitarian aid – regardless of whether Greece remains fully within the eurozone.
LONDON – The global economy faces a chronic problem of deficient nominal demand.
Eurozone inflation has again turned negative, and British inflation is zero and economic growth is slowing.
The US economy is slightly more robust, although even there recovery from the 2008 financial crisis remains disappointingly slow, employment rates are well below 2007 levels, and annual inflation will not reach the Federal Reserve’s 2% target for several years.
But the debate about which policies could boost demand remains inadequate, evasive, and confused.
In Shanghai, the G-20 foreign ministers committed to use all available tools – structural, monetary, and fiscal – to boost growth rates and prevent deflation.
But many of the key players are keener to point out what they can’t do than what they can.
Central banks frequently stress the limits of their powers, and bemoan lack of government progress toward “structural reform” – a catch-all phrase covering trade liberalization, labor- and product-market reforms, and measures to address medium-term fiscal challenges, such as pension age increases.
But while some of these might increase potential growth over the long term, almost none can make any difference in growth or inflation rates over the next 1-3 years.
Indeed, some structural reforms, such as increasing labor-market flexibility (by, say, making it easier to dismiss workers), can initially have a negative effect on consumer confidence and spending.
Vague references to “structural reform” should ideally be banned, with everyone forced to specify which particular reforms they are talking about and the timetable for any benefits that are achieved.
If the core problem is inadequate global demand, only monetary or fiscal policy can solve it.
But central bankers are right to stress the limits of what monetary policy alone can achieve.
The Bank of Japan recently introduced negative interest rates, and next week the European Central Bank will probably take its own rate still further into negative territory or launch yet more quantitative easing (QE).
But if banks are unwilling to impose negative rates on depositors, the actual and perverse consequence could be higher lending rates as banks attempt to maintain margins in the face of the running losses they now make on their central bank reserves.
As Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of England, has noted, negative interest rates should be used only in ways that stimulate overall global demand, rather than simply to move demand from one country to another via competitive devaluation.
The potential for yet more QE to change behavior in the real economy is equally unclear.
This means that nominal demand will rise only if governments deploy fiscal policy to reduce taxes or increase public expenditure – thereby, in Milton Friedman’s phrase, putting new demand directly “into the income stream.”
Japan’s finance ministry is convinced that it must reduce its large fiscal deficit by hiking the sales tax in April 2017.
British Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne is also determined to reduce, not increase, his country’s deficit.
The standard official mantra has therefore become that countries that still have “fiscal space” should use it.
But there are no grounds for believing the most obvious candidates – such as Germany – will actually do anything.
And there is no certainty that even if all the countries that have fiscal space used it, the boost to global demand would be sufficient.
These impasses have fueled growing fear that we are “out of ammunition” to fight inadequate growth and potential deflation.
But if our problem is inadequate nominal demand, there is one policy that will always work.
If governments run larger fiscal deficits and finance this not with interest-bearing debt but with central-bank money – nominal demand will undoubtedly increase, producing some mix of higher inflation and higher real output.
The option of so-called “helicopter money” is therefore increasingly discussed.
It is often claimed that monetizing fiscal deficits would commit central banks to keeping interest rates low forever, an approach that is bound to produce excessive inflation.
It is simultaneously argued (sometimes even by the same people) that monetary financing would not stimulate demand because people will fear a future “inflation tax.”
Very small money-financed deficits would produce only a minimal impact on nominal demand: very large ones would produce harmfully high inflation.
Somewhere in the middle there is an optimal policy – a common-sense proposition that is often missing from the debate.
Amid the confusion, the one really important political issue is ignored: whether we can design rules and allocate institutional responsibilities to ensure that monetary financing is used only in an appropriately moderate and disciplined fashion, or whether the temptation to use it to excess will prove irresistible.
If political irresponsibility is inevitable, we really are out of ammunition that we can use without blowing ourselves up.
But if, as I believe, the discipline problem can be solved, we need to start formulating the right rules and distribution of responsibilities.
One thing is certain: Relying on structural reform, on purely monetary policies, or on the fiscal policies available to governments that believe that all deficits must be financed with debt will not reverse the world’s chronic deficiency of nominal demand.
BEIJING – Until the Industrial Revolution, the world was quite flat in terms of per capita income.
But then fortunes rapidly diverged, with a few Western industrialized countries quickly achieving political and economic dominance worldwide.
In recent years – even before the financial crisis erupted in 2008 – it was clear that the global economic landscape had shifted again.
Until 2000, the G-7 accounted for about two-thirds of global GDP.
Today, China and a few large developing countries have become the world’s growth leaders.
Yet, despite talk of a rising Asia, only a handful of East Asian economies have moved from low- to high-income status during the past several decades.
Moreover, between 1950 and 2008, only 28 economies in the world – and only 12 non-Western economies – were able to narrow their per capita income gap with the United States by ten percentage points or more.
Meanwhile, more than 150 countries have been trapped in low- or middle-income status.
Narrowing the gap with industrialized high-income countries continues to be the world’s main development challenge.
In the post-colonial period following World War II, the prevailing development paradigm was a form of structuralism: the aim was to change poor countries’ industrial structure to resemble that of high-income countries.
Structuralists typically advised governments to adopt import-substitution strategies, using public-sector intervention to overcome “market failures.”
Countries that adhered to it experienced initial investment-led success, followed by repeated crises and stagnation.
Development thinking then shifted to the neoliberal Washington Consensus: privatization, liberalization, and stabilization would introduce to developing countries the idealized market institutions that had been established in advanced countries.
The results of the Washington Consensus reforms were at best controversial, and some economists have even described the 1980’s and 1990’s as “lost decades” in many developing countries.
Given persistent poverty in developing countries, bilateral donors and the global development community increasingly focused on education and health programs, both for humanitarian reasons and to generate growth.
But service delivery remained disappointing, so the focus shifted to improving project performance, which researchers like Esther Duflo at MIT’s Poverty Action Lab have pioneered with randomized controlled experiments.
But, judging from experience in North Africa, where education improved greatly under the old regimes, but failed to boost growth performance and create job opportunities for educated youth, the validity of such an approach as a fundamental model for development policy is dubious.
The East Asian and other economies that achieved dynamic growth and became industrialized did not follow import-substitution strategies; instead, they pursued export-oriented growth.
Likewise, countries like Mauritius, China, and Vietnam did not implement rapid liberalization (so-called “shock therapy”), which the Washington Consensus advocated; instead, they followed a dual-track gradual approach (and often continued to perform poorly on various governance indicators).
Both groups of countries achieved great advances in education, health, poverty reduction, and other human development indicators.
In my view, the shift from understanding the determinants of a country’s economic structure and facilitating its change is tantamount to throwing the baby out with the bath water.
Remember that Adam Smith called his great work An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations.
In a similar spirit, development economics should be built on inquiries into the nature and causes of modern economic growth – that is, on structural change in the process of economic development.
Development thinking so far has focused on what developing countries do not have (developed countries’ capital-intensive industries); on areas in which developed countries perform better (Washington Consensus policies and governance); or on areas that are important from a humanitarian point of view but do not directly contribute to structural change (health and education).
In my book New Structural Economics, I propose shifting the focus to areas where developing countries can do well (their comparative advantages) based on what they have (their endowments).
In our globalized world, a country’s optimal industrial structure – in which all industries are consistent with the country’s comparative advantages and are competitive in domestic and international markets – is determined by its endowment structure.
A well-functioning market is required to provide incentives to domestic firms to align their investment choices with the country’s comparative advantages.
If a country’s firms can do that, the economy will be competitive, capital will accumulate quickly, the endowment structure will change, areas of comparative advantages will shift, and the economy will need to upgrade its industrial structure to a relatively higher level of capital intensity.
So successful industrial upgrading and economic diversification requires first-movers, and improvements in skills, logistics, transportation, access to finance, and various other changes, many of which are beyond the first-movers’ capacity.
Governments need to provide adequate incentives to encourage first-movers, and should play an active role in providing the required improvements or coordinating private firms’ investments in those areas.
Developing countries may benefit from the advantage of backwardness by replicating the structural change that has already occurred in higher-income countries.
Based on the experiences of successful countries, every developing country has the potential to sustain 8% annual growth (or higher) for several decades, and to become a middle- or even a high-income country in one or two generations.
The key is to have the right policy framework in place to facilitate private-sector alignment with the country’s comparative advantages, and to benefit from latecomer advantages in the process of structural change.
LONDON – As the Brexit negotiations enter their endgame, a stalemate has become the most likely outcome.
It does not mean that Britain will “crash out” of the European Union with no agreement: deals in the European Union tend to be struck at the last possible moment.
But the British parliament will probably reject whatever arrangement Prime Minister Theresa May manages to negotiate with European leaders, and the likeliest way to end the deadlock will be to hold a new referendum that reconsiders the decision to leave the EU.
But now the political mechanics that could lead to a new referendum and the cancellation of Brexit are becoming clear.
A Norwegian-style “soft Brexit” that would keep Britain in the EU’s trading structures would be blocked by the Euroskeptics in May’s Conservative Party.
A “hard Brexit,” which would require border controls with the Republic of Ireland, is unacceptable to the Irish government and the EU.
And a hybrid arrangement that would take Britain out of the EU single market but keep Northern Ireland in would be a dealbreaker for Northern Ireland’s Democratic Unionist Party, whose support May needs to stay in power.
These competing vetoes explain May’s only strategy for delivering Brexit: to tell MPs and EU leaders that they must choose the lesser of two evils.
Either they accept whatever Brexit deal May proposes, or they will face a chaotic “no deal” Brexit that would be catastrophic not just for the United Kingdom, but for the entire EU.
But May’s effort to present a Hobson’s Choice suffers a fatal flaw: almost nobody believes that she would dare to inflict chaos on British businesses and voters.
A no-deal Brexit would rule out the transition period that Britain desperately needs to negotiate the thousands of rules, regulations, and standards required to continue trading with Europe, as well as the US, Japan, China, and other countries covered by agreements negotiated by the EU over many decades.
Without this transition period, British exports would come to a temporary standstill in March 2019, because agreements on product safety, labeling, food quality, public procurement, and hundreds of other little-known issues must be negotiated to trade under World Trade Organization rules – and these need to satisfy all 164 members of the WTO.
The disruption of trade flows would only be temporary, because Britain would eventually negotiate the necessary WTO agreements, but even a brief interruption could be devastating, as evidenced by the “sudden stop” in bank finance that lasted only a few weeks after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in 2008.
To make her no-deal threat more credible, May has tried sending dozens of “technical notices” to businesses, hospitals, and public agencies about the emergency preparations they should make.
Unfortunately for the Brexiteers, the effect of these warnings has been counter-productive: instead of triggering an upsurge of preparations, the prospect of aircraft being grounded, hospitals running out of medicines, and exports coming to a standstill have made a no-deal Brexit implausible to the point of absurdity and probably discouraged business decision-makers from wasting money preparing for such an unrealistic contingency.
The upshot is that even if May genuinely wanted to pursue a no-deal Brexit, a large parliamentary majority would unite to prevent it.
While there are questions about the exact parliamentary procedures, the political dynamics are clear.
Pursuing such a desperately risky gamble against the expressed wishes of a parliamentary majority would trigger a constitutional crisis that could be resolved only by appealing to voters – either through a general election or a new referendum.
The opposition Labour Party would demand a general election, but the Conservatives, split as they are over Europe, would unite to block this.
Once the election gambit failed, Labour would almost surely support a referendum, which is backed by 85% of its members.
Only a few Conservatives would then be needed to create a referendum majority, and they might find themselves with an unexpected ally: Theresa May.
For May, a referendum could be the key that unlocks the cage in which her own “red lines” have trapped her.
Once it was clear that the only option for leaving the EU would be to crash out with no deal, May could honestly claim that she had followed the mandate from the 2016 referendum to deliver Brexit, but that this would involve more disruption than predicted.
It would therefore be right to ask voters where or not they still wanted to go ahead with Brexit on these tougher terms.
By posing this question, May could outmaneuver Boris Johnson and her other rivals.
Because the hardline Brexiteers have presented “no deal” as a perfectly acceptable outcome, they could not object if this were the form of Brexit put to voters.
If it won, May could not be held responsible and would have the satisfaction of watching Johnson cope with the resulting chaos.
Much more likely is that a new referendum would reject a no-deal Brexit, not just because of the economic risks, but also because the demographic balance of the UK population has shifted in favor of pro-European voters by around one million since 2016.
If voters rejected “no deal” in favor of no Brexit, May’s hardline opponents would be silenced, and her position as Prime Minister would be secured until the 2022 election.
Better still, the end of Brexit uncertainty would result in an economic rebound, almost certainly guaranteeing a Conservative victory in 2022.
In short, a new referendum to break the impending parliamentary deadlock would probably mean that Britain remains in Europe and May remains in Downing Street.
On December 17 of last year, the European Council decided to open accession negotiations with Turkey this October.
Two conditions were put to the Turkish government: a comprehensive legal reform aimed at reinforcing the rule of law and human rights, and approval of the Adaptation Protocol of the Ankara Agreement, which extends the customs union with the EU to all new member states, including the Republic of Cyprus.
Turkey has met these conditions: the legal reform entered into force on June 1, and the Protocol was signed on July 29.
A formal recognition by Turkey of the Republic of Cyprus, including its extension to the Northern part of the island, was not requested as a precondition for starting accession talks.
This is a complex matter related to the efforts by UN Secretary General Kofi Annan to negotiate a comprehensive settlement leading to reunification of the island.
Last year, both Turkey and the Turkish Cypriot community accepted the Secretary General’s proposals, which were, however, rejected by the Greek Cypriot side.
There is every reason to expect Annan to resume his good offices soon and to bring the question to a positive conclusion well before Turkey’s possible entry into the EU around 2015.
The Cyprus issue should therefore not be construed as an obstacle to the start of negotiations.
The same is true of the reported intention of some EU governments to have the so-called “Privileged Partnership” concept explicitly included in the negotiating framework as an alternative to full membership.
This proposal was discussed at last December’s European Council meeting and rejected, resulting in a reference to “open-ended negotiations” in the Council’s conclusions.
That wording – never used in previous enlargement rounds – may have ruffled Turkey’s feathers, but it was finally accepted as the type of constructive ambiguity that is so often used in international diplomacy.
It is nonetheless obvious from the very nature of accession negotiations that full membership must be the goal.
Without that prospect, no candidate country would go through the painful process of adopting the tens of thousands of rules and regulations contained in the Acquis Communautaire (the body of EU law).
To ensure that it does, is, after all, the main purpose of accession talks.
Moreover, it is difficult to imagine what advantages could be offered to Turkey in the framework of a “Privileged Partnership” beyond its long-time status as an Associate Member of the EU.
The Customs Union concluded ten years ago allows free trade for all but agricultural goods.
Turkey is invited to Council meetings, it can participate in various EU programs and in manifestations of the European Common Foreign Policy, and, as a member of NATO, it is a partner in EU-NATO security cooperation.
Finally, like all candidate countries, Turkey also receives financial and technical assistance in support of ongoing reform programs.
Short of full membership, there is hardly room for added value in Turkey’s relationship with the EU.
Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has spelt it out with the necessary clarity: “If we stick to what we have ourselves decided at the highest political level in the European Council, as we should, I am reasonably confident that the negotiations shall start on the October 3.”
This statement is to the credit of the European Commission, and there is not much to be added, except to emphasize that it is up to EU governments to treat Turkey with the fairness that all candidate countries deserve.
To renege on formal decisions and commitments, or to add last-minute obstacles, would make a mockery of the Union’s credibility.
PRINCETON – Next month, a judge in Oregon will begin hearing a case brought against the United States government on behalf of 21 young people, supported by the non-profit organization Our Children’s Trust, who allege that the authorities’ active contributions to the climate crisis violate their constitutional rights.
The government defendants have repeatedly tried – so far without success – to have the case thrown out or delayed, and the trial is currently scheduled to start on October 29.
In principle, governments, not courts, are best placed to decide which policies will best solve environmental and social problems.
In 1992, countries, including the US, China, India, and all European states (and a total of 189 by 2006) accepted responsibility for addressing climate change.
Meeting at the “Earth Summit” in Rio de Janeiro, they agreed to stabilize greenhouse gases “at a low enough level to prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.”
The agreement did not specify what level is low enough to prevent such dangerous interference with our climate, but the scientific consensus is that to allow the global temperature to rise to an average of more than 2°C above pre-industrial levels is to risk catastrophe.
The basis of this conclusion is that warming of this magnitude may make much more warming inevitable.
When the Arctic Ocean warms, it contains less sunlight-reflecting ice and more dark water that absorbs the sun’s heat.
Similarly, as the frozen Siberian earth thaws, it releases methane, a powerful greenhouse gas that accelerates global warming.
Scientists predict that exceeding that lower limit will cause low-lying Pacific island states to disappear beneath the rising seas, and will lead to unprecedented drought, wildfire, and flooding.
To preserve safe climate conditions, we need to hold the global temperature increase to no more than 1°C.
Yet, with very few exceptions, governments have failed to take sufficient action to halt climate change, and most exacerbate the danger by continuing to support the use of fossil fuels.
Hence activists in Belgium, Colombia, Ireland, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Switzerland, and the Netherlands are seeking to use the courts to gain what they cannot obtain through political action.
The first climate litigation to win a positive decision was Urgenda Foundation v. The State of Netherlands, in which a Dutch court ruled, in 2015, that the government must ensure that the country’s emissions are cut by one quarter within five years.
In response, the Dutch government did step up its actions to reduce emissions, but it also appealed the judgment.
In October, The Hague Court of Appeals will deliver its verdict on that appeal.
Important as Urgenda has been, Juliana v. United States is by far the most significant climate case to date.
If ever a case has deserved to be called “the trial of the century,” this is it.
Its outcome has ramifications for everyone who will live on Earth during the remainder of the twenty-first century and perhaps for several centuries beyond.
The US is the world’s second-largest greenhouse-gas emitter, and its per capita emissions are about twice those of the largest emitter, China.
If we take the view that every person on this planet is entitled to an equal share of the atmosphere’s capacity to absorb our greenhouse-gas emissions, then the US is emitting 3.5 times its fair share.
The US emits more greenhouse gases than India, for example, although it has only one-quarter of the population.
Moreover, the principle of equal per capita emissions is generous to the old industrialized countries, because it ignores their historical responsibility for the past emissions that have led to the situation we face today.
In not sharply reducing its greenhouse-gas emissions, the US arguably is acting contrary to international law, for it is violating the most basic human rights guaranteed under the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other international covenants.
Plausible as this argument may be, it is not the basis of the plaintiffs’ case in Juliana.
The lawyers working pro bono on the case understand that to win, they will ultimately have to persuade the conservative-dominated US Supreme Court that the government’s failure to act is a clear violation of its constitutional responsibilities.
The plaintiffs claim that their government’s active contribution to climate change has violated their constitutional rights to life, liberty, and property.
When the government sought to prevent the case from being heard, the federal district court of Oregon issued a historic ruling that “the right to a climate system capable of sustaining human life is fundamental to a free and ordered society.”
When Juliana v. United States is appealed to the US Supreme Court, as seems inevitable, the question may no longer be whether the preservation of the plaintiffs’ constitutional rights requires “a climate system capable of sustaining human life”; it undeniably does.
Instead, the Court will have to decide whether it is willing to heed the scientific evidence that the actions of the US government are indeed jeopardizing the survival of human life on our planet.
If it is, even the most conservative justices will find it difficult to escape the conclusion that the government is in violation of the US Constitution.
CHICAGO – Monetary and fiscal policies in the United States, both in this recession and the recession of 2001, have been among the most accommodating in the industrial world.
Indeed, John Taylor of Stanford University attributes the recent financial crisis to excessively stimulatory monetary policy towards the end of Alan Greenspan’s tenure as head of the US Federal Reserve.
From the trough of recessions, recovery to pre-recession output levels took less than two quarters on average, and employment recovered within eight months.
For example, in 2001, it took just one quarter for output to recover, but 38 months for jobs to come back.
Some economists argue that, unlike past recoveries, when workers who were temporarily laid off were rehired, job losses starting in 1991 were more permanent.
Unemployed workers had to find jobs in new industries, which took more time and training.
So, rather than hire in panic at the first sign of a recovery for fear that they will be unable to do so later and lose sales, firms would rather make sure that the recovery is well established before adding workers.
Regardless of the true explanation, the US is singularly unprepared for jobless recoveries.
Moreover, because health-care benefits are often tied to jobs, an unemployed worker also risks losing access to affordable health care.
Short-duration benefits may have been appropriate when recoveries were fast and jobs plentiful, because the fear of losing benefits before finding a job may have given workers an incentive to look harder.
But, with few jobs being created, a positive incentive has turned into a source of great anxiety.
Even those who have jobs fear that they could lose them and be cast adrift.
President George H.W. Bush is widely believed to have lost his re-election bid, despite winning a popular war in Iraq, because he seemed out of touch with public hardship following the 1991 recession.
Economic recovery is all about jobs, not output, and politicians are willing to push for economic stimulus, both fiscal (tax cuts or government spending) and monetary (lower short-term interest rates), until jobs start reappearing.
In theory, this is what democracy is all about – policy responding to the needs of the people.
In practice, though, public pressure to do something quickly enables politicians to run roughshod over the usual checks and balances on government policy making.
Long-term spending and tax policies are enacted under the shadow of an emergency, with the party that happens to be in power at the time of the downturn getting to push its pet agenda.
Much of what is enacted as stimulus has little immediate effect on job creation, but does have an adverse long-term effect on government finances.
For example, the 2009 stimulus package enacted by the Obama administration had many billions of dollars devoted to cancer research, though such research employs few people directly and is spent over a long time horizon – far beyond that of even a prolonged recovery.
Equally deleterious to economic health is the recent vogue of cutting interest rates to near zero and holding them there for a sustained period.
It is far from clear that near-zero short-term interest rates (as compared to just low interest rates) have much additional effect in encouraging firms to create jobs when powerful economic forces make them reluctant to hire.
For example, households and investment managers, reluctant to keep money in safe money-market funds, instead seek to invest in securities with longer maturities and higher credit risk, so long as they offer extra yield.
Likewise, money fleeing low US interest rates (and, more generally, industrial countries) has pushed up emerging-market equity and real-estate prices, setting them up for a fall (as we witnessed recently with the flight to safety following Europe’s financial turmoil).
Moreover, even if corporations in the US are not hiring, corporations elsewhere are.
Brazil’s unemployment rate, for example, is at lows not seen for decades.
If the Fed were to accept the responsibilities of its de facto role as the world’s central banker, it would have to admit that its policy rates are not conducive to stable world growth.
Policy would still be accommodative if the Fed maintained low interest rates rather than the zero level that was appropriate for a panic.
And this would give savers less of an incentive to search for yield, thus avoiding financial instability.
Politicians will not sit quietly, however, if the Fed attempts to raise rates.
Their thinking – and the Fed’s – follows the misguided calculus that if low rates are good for jobs, ultra-low rates must be even better.
Emerging studies on the risk-taking and asset-price inflation engendered by ultra-low policy rates will eventually convince Fed policymakers to change their stance.
But, if politicians are to become less anxious about jobs, perhaps we need to start discussing whether jobless recoveries are here to stay, and whether the US safety net, devised for a different era, needs to be modified.
ATHENS ­­– Even as the European Union and the International Monetary Fund lay the groundwork for a giant first-round bailout, debate is swirling about whether Greece can avoid sovereign default.
Some view Greece as Argentina revisited, noting the stunning parallels with the country that in 2001 set the record for the world’s largest default (in dollar terms).
Others, such as Greek Prime Minister George Papandreou, see the country’s problems as difficult but manageable, and complain of interference from ill-intentioned foreign speculators.
One has only to look at official data, including Greece’s external debt, which amounts to 170% of national income, or its gaping government budget deficit (almost 13% of GDP).
Thanks to decades of low investment in statistical capacity, no one trusts the Greek government’s figures.
As demonstrated in my recent book with Carmen Reinhart This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly , Greece has been in default roughly one out of every two years since it first gained independence in the nineteenth century.
Indeed, the historical evidence slams you over the head with the fact that, whereas government debt can drift upward inexorably for years, the end usually comes quite suddenly.
And it can happen to any country, although advanced countries can usually tighten fiscal policy with sufficient speed and credibility that the pain comes mainly in slower growth.
Unfortunately, for emerging markets, adjustment is often impossible without help from the outside.
But the government urgently needs to implement credible fiscal adjustment, concentrating not only higher taxation, but also on rolling back some of the incredible growth in government spending – from 45% of GDP to 52% of GDP – that occurred between 2007 and 2009.
The government must avoid relying too much on proposals for tax increases, which ultimately feed back on growth and sustainability.
It would be far preferable to balance tax increases with some reversal of runaway government spending.
One of the more striking regularities that Reinhart and I found is that after a wave of international banking crises, a wave of sovereign defaults and restructurings often follows within a few years.
This correlation is hardly surprising, given the massive build-up in public debts that countries typically experience after a banking crisis.
We have certainly seen that this time, with crisis countries’ debt already having risen by more than 75% since 2007.
But, whereas we are likely to see a wave of defaults and IMF programs this time, too, fiscal meltdown does not have to hit every highly indebted country.
Indeed, what a country like Greece should be doing is pulling out all the stops to stay clear of the first and second wave of restructurings and IMF programs.
If it can, then perhaps watching other countries suffer will help convince the local political elite to consent to adjustment.
If not, Greece will have less control over its adjustment and potentially experience far greater trauma, perhaps eventually outright default.
There is an old joke about two men who are trapped by a lion in the jungle after a plane crash.
When the first of them starts putting on his sneakers, the other asks why.
The first answers: “I am getting ready to make a run for it.”
But you cannot outrun a lion, says the other man, to which the first replies: “I don’t have to outrun the lion.
Greece has yet to put on its sneakers, while other troubled countries, such as Ireland, race ahead with massive fiscal adjustments.
Greece’s new Socialist government is hampered by campaign promises that suggested the money was there to solve the problems, when in fact things turned out to be far worse than anyone imagined.
Unions and agricultural groups tie up traffic with protests every other day, hinting at possible escalation.
Most Greeks are taking whatever action they can to avoid the government’s likely insatiable thirst for higher tax revenues, with wealthy individuals shifting money abroad and ordinary people migrating to the underground economy.
Greece’s underground economy, estimated to be as large as 30% of GDP, is already one of Europe’s biggest, and it is growing by the day.
In the case of Argentina, a pair of massive IMF loans in 2000 and 2001 ultimately only delayed the inevitable harsh adjustment, and made the country’s ultimate default even more traumatic.
Like Argentina, Greece has a fixed exchange rate, a long history of fiscal deficits, and an even longer history of sovereign defaults.
Nevertheless, Greece can avoid an Argentine-style meltdown, but it needs to engage in far more determined adjustment.
WASHINGTON, DC – Financial markets and the news media have one thing in common: they tend to oscillate rapidly between hype and gloom.
In the last few months, enthusiasm about these countries’ post-2008 economic resilience and growth potential has given way to bleak forecasts, with economists like Ricardo Hausmann declaring that “the emerging-market party” is coming to an end.
Many now believe that the recent broad-based growth slowdown in emerging economies is not cyclical, but a reflection of underlying structural flaws.
That interpretation contradicts those (including me) who, not long ago, were anticipating a switchover in the engines of the global economy, with autonomous sources of growth in emerging and developing economies compensating for the drag of struggling advanced economies.
To be sure, the baseline scenario for the post-crisis “new normal” has always entailed slower global economic growth than during the pre-2008 boom.
For major advanced economies, the financial crisis five years ago marked the end of a prolonged period of debt-financed domestic consumption, based on wealth effects derived from unsustainable asset-price overvaluation.
The crisis thus led to the demise of China’s export-led growth model, which had helped to buoy commodity prices and, in turn, bolster GDP growth in commodity-exporting developing countries.
Against this background, a return to pre-crisis growth patterns could not reasonably be expected, even after advanced economies completed the deleveraging process and repaired their balance sheets.
But developing countries’ economic performance was still expected to decouple from that of developed countries and drive global output by finding new, relatively autonomous sources of growth.
According to this view, healthy public and private balance sheets and existing infrastructure bottlenecks would provide room for increased investment and higher total factor productivity in many developing countries.
Technological convergence and the transfer of surplus labor to more productive tradable activities would continue, despite the advanced economies’ anemic growth.
At the same time, rapidly growing middle classes across the developing world would constitute a new source of demand.
With their share of global GDP increasing, developing countries would sustain relative demand for commodities, thereby preventing prices from reverting to the low levels that prevailed in the 1980’s and 1990’s.
Improvements in the quality of developing countries’ economic policies in the decade preceding the global financial crisis – reflected in the broad scope available to them in responding to it – reinforced this optimism.
Indeed, emerging countries have largely recognized the need for a comprehensive strategy, comprising targeted policies and deep structural reforms, to develop new sources of growth.
It has become apparent, however, that emerging-market enthusiasts underestimated at least two critical factors.
First, emerging economies’ motivation to transform their growth models was weaker than expected.
The global economic environment – characterized by massive amounts of liquidity and low interest rates stemming from unconventional monetary policy in advanced economies – led most emerging economies to use their policy space to build up existing drivers of growth, rather than develop new ones.
But the growth returns have dwindled, while imbalances have worsened.
Countries like Russia, India, Brazil, South Africa, and Turkey used the space available for credit expansion to support consumption, without a corresponding increase in investment.
China’s non-financial corporate debt increased dramatically, partly owing to dubious real-estate investments.
Moreover, nothing was done in anticipation of the end of terms-of-trade gains in resource-rich countries like Russia, Brazil, Indonesia, and South Africa, which have been facing rising wage costs and supply-capacity limits.
And fiscal weakness and balance-of-payments fragility have become more acute in India, Indonesia, South Africa, and Turkey.
The second problem with emerging-economy forecasts was their failure to account for the vigor with which vested interests and other political forces would resist reform – a major oversight, given how uneven these countries’ reform efforts had been prior to 2008.
Nonetheless, while emerging economies’ prospects were clearly over-hyped in the wake of the crisis, the bleak forecasts that dominate today’s headlines are similarly exaggerated.
There are still a number of factors indicating that emerging economies’ role in the global economy will continue to grow – just not as rapidly or dramatically as previously thought.
This summer, the mere suggestion of a monetary-policy reversal in the United States sparked a surge in bond yields, which triggered an asset sell-off in several major emerging economies.
Perhaps that experience will serve as a wake-up call for these countries’ leaders.
Only by recognizing the weaknesses of old growth patterns and pursuing the needed structural reforms can emerging economies achieve strong, stable, and sustainable GDP growth – and fulfill their potential as the global economy’s main engines.
NEW YORK – After falling for more than a decade, the number of hungry people in the world is rising once again.
This year was marked by the worst global food crisis since World War II, with South Sudan, Yemen, Somalia, and Nigeria either experiencing famine or teetering on the brink.
More than 20 million people in those four countries alone remain severely food-insecure, and the United Nations estimates that $1.8 billion in immediate humanitarian aid is needed.
Political instability and conflict have contributed heavily to this food insecurity, but insufficient food production has also likely heightened tensions and exacerbated hunger.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, where three of the four countries on the verge of famine are located, crop yields have long lagged behind the rest of the world, owing to poor farm inputs, such as low-quality seeds and fertilizer.
Investing in agriculture is one of the most effective ways to end hunger and improve political stability.
There are 50 million smallholder farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa alone, and they support many millions more.
Countries on the continent that have invested heavily in agricultural development and smallholder farmers have been successful at avoiding famine.
Consider the example of Ethiopia, which experienced one of the worst famines in history in the mid-1980s.
An estimated one million people died during that crisis, which was caused by a combination of conflict and drought, and it took many years for the country to recover.
Oxfam attributes this to the fact that the government was better prepared to deliver food and water to millions.
The country has also vastly improved its farming infrastructure, and new irrigation and drinking water systems provide rural areas with easy access to clean, safe water sources.
For more than a decade, the Ethiopian government has made agricultural development a top priority.
In 2010, it created the Ethiopian Agricultural Transformation Agency, a public entity dedicated to boosting the productivity of the agriculture sector.
As the noted British author and Africa researcher Alex de Waal has noted, “Politics creates famine, and politics can stop it.”
While domestic and international contributions still flow during relief efforts, it is Ethiopia’s long-term investments that have increased the country’s resilience.
An increase in strategic agricultural investments, from African donors or international sources, could help other countries in the region reap similar rewards.
Climate change is making such investments even more urgent, as extreme weather events – both flooding and droughts – are becoming more common throughout Sub-Saharan Africa.
Even without government support, however, farmers can take modest and cost-effective steps immediately to mitigate climate shocks.
By using smart farming techniques such as drought-resistant seeds, intercropping, composting, and crop diversification, farmers can blunt the effects of extreme weather at very low costs.
Trees are one of the most effective tools we have for fighting climate change, and they also make economic sense for small farmers.
A farmer who invests $2 in seedlings can make a profit of more than $80 in ten years, when some of the full-grown trees can be cut and sold.
Trees also benefit the environment while they are growing – by absorbing carbon, improving soil health, and preventing erosion.
Farmers who have an asset base of trees, livestock, or cash generated by selling crop surpluses are better able to withstand weather shocks.
And, as our organization is currently demonstrating in six African countries, farmers can build their asset bases with training and financial support.
That is why we believe African governments and bilateral donors should deepen their investments in programs that provide farmers with the skills to produce long-term crops, especially trees, sustainably.
Inexpensive practices – such as planting crops in rows, weeding correctly, and applying fertilizer in micro-doses – are also proven methods to increase crop production dramatically.
With the effects of climate change expected to intensify in coming years, Africa’s smallholder farmers must prepare now for a more turbulent future.
The United States has historically been the world’s largest donor to global food security programs, but the future of this leadership role under President Donald Trump is uncertain.
While global food security initiatives enjoy bipartisan support in the US Congress, the Trump administration’s proposed foreign aid budget recommends deep funding cuts to these programs.
As US support waivers, African and European governments, foundations, institutional donors, and practitioners must be ready to step in to help African farmers build long-term resiliency.
Investing in agriculture is the most efficient way to improve food security in Africa, while ensuring that people on the front lines of the fight against climate change can maintain thriving economies and sustainable, healthy environments.
Only through careful planning, and by following the lead of countries like Ethiopia, can Sub-Saharan Africa address the underlying causes of hunger.
Although food security is a complex problem to solve, preventing future famines doesn’t have to be.
NEW YORK – The horrific Ebola epidemic in at least four West African countries (Guinea, Liberia, Sierra Leone, and Nigeria) demands not only an emergency response to halt the outbreak; it also calls for re-thinking some basic assumptions of global public health.
We live in an age of emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases that can spread quickly through global networks.
Ebola is the latest of many recent epidemics, also including AIDS, SARS, H1N1 flu, H7N9 flu, and others.
AIDS is the deadliest of these killers, claiming nearly 36 million lives since 1981.
Of course, even larger and more sudden epidemics are possible, such as the 1918 influenza during World War I, which claimed 50-100 million lives (far more than the war itself).
And, though the 2003 SARS outbreak was contained, causing fewer than 1,000 deaths, the disease was on the verge of deeply disrupting several East Asian economies including China’s.
First, most emerging infectious diseases are zoonoses, meaning that they start in animal populations, sometimes with a genetic mutation that enables the jump to humans.
SARS most likely came from civets traded in animal markets in southern China; and influenza strains such as H1N1 and H7N9 arose from genetic re-combinations of viruses among wild and farm animals.
New zoonotic diseases are inevitable as humanity pushes into new ecosystems (such as formerly remote forest regions); the food industry creates more conditions for genetic recombination; and climate change scrambles natural habitats and species interactions.
Second, once a new infectious disease appears, its spread through airlines, ships, megacities, and trade in animal products is likely to be extremely rapid.
These epidemic diseases are new markers of globalization, revealing through their chain of death how vulnerable the world has become from the pervasive movement of people and goods.
Poor, often illiterate, individuals are generally unaware of how infectious diseases – especially unfamiliar diseases – are transmitted, making them much more likely to become infected and to infect others.
Moreover, given poor nutrition and lack of access to basic health services, their weakened immune systems are easily overcome by infections that better nourished and treated individuals can survive.
And “de-medicalized” conditions – with few if any professional health workers to ensure an appropriate public-health response to an epidemic (such as isolation of infected individuals, tracing of contacts, surveillance, and so forth) – make initial outbreaks more severe.
Finally, the required medical responses, including diagnostic tools and effective medications and vaccines, inevitably lag behind the emerging diseases.
This requires cutting-edge biotechnology, immunology, and ultimately bioengineering to create large-scale industrial responses (such as millions of doses of vaccines or medicines in the case of large epidemics).
The AIDS crisis, for example, called forth tens of billions of dollars for research and development – and similarly substantial commitments by the pharmaceutical industry – to produce lifesaving antiretroviral drugs at global scale.
Yet each breakthrough inevitably leads to the pathogen’s mutation, rendering previous treatments less effective.
There is no ultimate victory, only a constant arms race between humanity and disease-causing agents.
So, is the world ready for Ebola, a newly lethal influenza, a mutation of HIV that could speed the transfer of the disease, or the development of new multi-drug-resistant strains of malaria or other pathogens?
Though investment in public health increased significantly after 2000, leading to notable successes in the fights against AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria, there has recently been a marked shortfall in global spending on public health relative to need.
Donor countries, failing to anticipate and respond adequately to new and ongoing challenges, have subjected the World Health Organization to a debilitating budget squeeze, while funding for the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria has fallen far short of the sums needed to win the war against these diseases.
First, the United States, the European Union, the Gulf countries, and East Asian states should establish a flexible fund under WHO leadership to combat the current Ebola epidemic, probably at an initial level of $50-$100 million, pending further developments.
This would allow a rapid public-health response that is commensurate to the immediate challenge.
Second, donor countries should quickly expand both the Global Fund’s budget and mandate, so that it becomes a global health fund for low-income countries.
The main goal would be to help the poorest countries establish basic health systems in every slum and rural community, a concept known as Universal Health Coverage (UHC).
The greatest urgency lies in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, where health conditions and extreme poverty are worst, and preventable and controllable infectious diseases continue to rage.
In particular, these regions should train and deploy a new cadre of community health workers, trained to recognize disease symptoms, provide surveillance, and administer diagnoses and appropriate treatments.
At a cost of just $5 billion per year, it would be possible to ensure that well-trained health workers are present in every African community to provide lifesaving interventions and respond effectively to health emergencies like Ebola.
Finally, high-income countries must continue to invest adequately in global disease surveillance, the WHO’s outreach capacities, and life-saving biomedical research, which has consistently delivered massive benefits for humanity during the past century.
Despite tight national budgets, it would be reckless to put our very survival on the fiscal chopping block.
LONDON – The king of Bhutan wants to make us all happier.
Governments, he says, should aim to maximize their people’s Gross National Happiness rather than their Gross National Product.
Does this new emphasis on happiness represent a shift or just a passing fad?
It is easy to see why governments should de-emphasize economic growth when it is proving so elusive.
No doubt this mood will pass when growth revives, as it is bound to.
Nevertheless, a deeper shift in attitude toward growth has occurred, which is likely to make it a less important lodestar in the future – especially in rich countries.
When people started talking about the “natural” limits to growth in the 1970’s, they meant the impending exhaustion of food and non-renewable natural resources.
As the Stern Review of 2006 emphasized, we must sacrifice some growth today to ensure that we do not all fry tomorrow.
The fewer people there are, the less risk we face of heating up the planet.
But, instead of accepting the natural decline in their populations, rich-country governments absorb more and more people to hold down wages and thereby grow faster.
It is increasingly understood that growth does not necessarily increase our sense of well-being.
In 1974, the economist Richard Easterlin published a famous paper, “Does Economic Growth Improve the Human Lot?
After correlating per capita income and self-reported happiness levels across a number of countries, he reached a startling conclusion: probably not.
Above a rather low level of income (enough to satisfy basic needs), Easterlin found no correlation between happiness and GNP per head.
In 1972, two economists, William Nordhaus and James Tobin, introduced a measure that they called “Net Economic Welfare,” obtained by deducting from GNP “bad” outputs, like pollution, and adding non-market activities, like leisure.
They showed that a society with more leisure and less work could have as much welfare as one with more work – and therefore more GNP – and less leisure.
More recent metrics have tried to incorporate a wider range of “quality of life” indicators.
The trouble is that you can measure quantity of stuff, but not quality of life.
How one combines quantity and quality in some index of “life satisfaction” is a matter of morals rather than economics, so it is not surprising that most economists stick to their quantitative measures of “welfare.”
But another finding has also started to influence the current debate on growth: poor people within a country are less happy than rich people.
In other words, above a low level of sufficiency, peoples’ happiness levels are determined much less by their absolute income than by their income relative to some reference group.
We constantly compare our lot with that of others, feeling either superior or inferior, whatever our income level; well-being depends more on how the fruits of growth are distributed than on their absolute amount.
Put another way, what matters for life satisfaction is the growth not of mean income but of median income – the income of the typical person.
Consider a population of ten people (say, a factory) in which the managing director earns $150,000 a year and the other nine, all workers, earn $10,000 each.
The mean average of their incomes is $25,000, but 90% earn $10,000.
With this kind of income distribution, it would be surprising if growth increased the typical person’s sense of well-being.
In rich societies over the last three decades, mean incomes have been rising steadily, but typical incomes have been stagnating or even falling.
In other words, a minority – a very small minority in countries like the United States and Britain – has captured most of the gains of growth.
In such cases, it is not more growth that we want, but more equality.
More equality would not only produce the contentment that flows from more security and better health, but also the satisfaction that flows from having more leisure, more time with family and friends, more respect from one's fellows, and more lifestyle choices.
Great inequality makes us hungrier for goods than we would otherwise be, by constantly reminding us that we have less than the next person.
We live in a pushy society with turbo-charged fathers and “tiger” mothers, constantly goading themselves and their children to “get ahead.”
“I confess I am not charmed with the ideal of life held out by those who think…that the trampling, crushing, elbowing, and treading on each other's heels, which form the existing type of social life, are the most desirable lot of human kind….The best state for human nature is that in which, while no one is poor, no one desires to be richer, nor has any reason to fear being thrust back, by the efforts of others to push themselves forward.”
That lesson has been lost on most economists today, but not on the king of Bhutan – or on the many people who have come to recognize the limits of quantifiable wealth.
New Delhi – A month after they first queued to vote in India’s mammoth general election, the country’s voters will learn the outcome on May 16.
The election, staggered over five phases – involving five polling days over four weeks, rather than one “election day” – will determine who rules the world’s largest democracy.
Only one thing is certain: no single party will win a majority on its own.
India’s last two governments each served a full term and presided over significant economic growth, even though they comprised 23 and 20 parties, respectively.
Coalition politics gives representation to the myriad interests that make up a diverse and complex society, and ensures that the country as a whole accepts the policies ultimately adopted.
But coalition rule can also often mean governance of the lowest common denominator, as resistance by any of the government’s significant members to a policy can delay or even thwart it.
In India’s parliamentary system, if a coalition loses its majority, the government falls, and keeping allies together can sometimes prove a greater priority than getting things done.
India’s national elections are really an aggregate of thirty different state elections, each influenced by its own local considerations, regional political currents, and different patterns of political incumbency.
Soon after May 16, the largest single party that emerges will seek to construct a coalition out of a diverse array of victors from the various states.
The most likely is that Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s Indian National Congress, currently leading the government, emerges once again as the largest single party and assembles a new ruling coalition.
The main alternative would be majority alliance put together by the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), led by the 82-year-old Lal Krishna Advani.
But there is a third possibility: a motley collection of regional parties, together with the Communists, gets enough seats to prevent either of the two big parties from forming a government.
In that case, a “hung parliament” could see a “third front” coming to power as a minority government, supported tactically by one of the big parties.
This has happened before – and each time, the government that resulted fell within a year.
Though the big parties are broadly committed to continuing an economic policy of liberalization and growth, the BJP is mostly focused on the well-being of India’s merchant class, whereas Congress wishes to redistribute enhanced government revenues to the poor through generous social programs.
The left, which would strongly influence any “third front” government, are staunchly opposed to economic liberalization and wish to strengthen, rather than dilute, India’s large public sector.
In foreign policy, India’s growing closeness with the United States under both the BJP and the Congress has proved controversial at home, with leftist parties threatening to scrap the Indo-US nuclear deal and break defense ties with Israel if they come to power.
Should the regional parties dominate the government, domestic politics would strongly impact India’s foreign policy: the anger of Tamil voters over events in Sri Lanka, or of Muslims over Gaza, would be reflected in the government and therefore constrain policy options.
The BJP has promised a more hawkish security posture than Congress in the wake of the Mumbai terrorist attacks, but when it was in power it conducted itself remarkably similarly to its rival, initiating a peace process with Pakistan.
The biggest differences among the various groupings consist in the tone and tenor of their respective visions of India.
Congress remains a “big tent” party, committed to preserving India’s pluralism and conscious of the multiple identities and interests of India’s many peoples.
The BJP, which accuses Congress of “appeasing” India’s minorities, hews to a staunchly Hindu-chauvinist line, and has received support from some of the most bigoted and intolerant sections of Indian society.
The “third front” involves assorted petty particularisms – parties representing the sectarian interests of specific castes, sub-regions, or linguistic groups.
The danger is that such groups could accentuate the divisions of a fractious society, rather than pull everyone together in the collective national interest.
The 2004 elections were won by the Congress party, led by a woman political leader of Roman Catholic faith and Italian descent (Sonia Gandhi), who made way for a Sikh prime minister (Manmohan Singh) to be sworn by a Muslim (President Abdul Kalam) in a country that is 81% Hindu.
But the ultimate reality will remain that of a coalition government trying to make progress in a contentious polity.
In India, policy changes require political consensus within the ruling coalition, labor laws are strongly defended by unions and political parties, and controversial decisions can be challenged on the streets, in the courts, and ultimately at the polls.
Necessary policy reforms advocated by a ruling party are often held hostage to the prejudices of its allies.
But it does come, and once a policy consensus has been established, it tends to be durable.
Indian democracy has often been likened to the stately progress of the elephant – ponderous in its gait and reluctant to change course, but not easily swayed from its new path when it does.
The elephant of Indian democracy will acquire a new set of mahouts before the month’s end.
Who they are will have a major impact on the fortunes and prospects of one-sixth of humanity.
That alone makes the election results due on May 16 worth the world’s attention.
This Greek aphorism often comes to mind when I think of the economic and political changes in my lifetime.
And now we are in a phase in which Asia is catching up with the West and American hegemony is being challenged.
While American casino capitalism has collapsed, and America’s European economic satellites are suffering, China seems to be taking advantage of the situation, increasing its trade surplus in the midst of the global economic crisis.
Indeed, in the first four months of this year, China became the world’s leading goods exporter, overtaking Germany, the previous champion.
It is true that in other economic terms, China still lags far behind.
Although China accounts for 20% of the world’s population, its share of global GDP currently is only 7%.
By contrast, the United States and the European Union account for 54% of global GDP, despite having only 12% of the world’s population.
But these figures are changing rapidly, owing to China’s exuberant growth.
From 1995 to 2008, China’s economy grew by 229%, while the world economy grew by 63%, the US by 45%, and 27-member EU by only 37%.
It may be difficult for China to ever match the success of a small Asian country like Singapore, which has already overtaken the US in terms of GDP per capita as measured by purchasing power parity.
Yet China will undoubtedly become the world’s largest economic power in the foreseeable future.
To achieve this leadership position, it needs less than a quarter of US per capita GDP, because its population is more than four times larger.
The forces of globalization that were liberated by the fall of Communism have created a better world, with rapid economic convergence and shrinking inequality.
The proportion of people living below the World Bank’s poverty line of $1.25 a day shrank from 52% in 1981 to only 25% in 2005.
More than 50% of the world’s population is now considered middle class, with a living standard above the average of the developed countries’ poverty lines ($8.2 at 1996 PPP prices).
And the worldwide Gini coefficient of inter-country inequality fell from 0.653 to 0.556 from 1980 to 2007, owing largely to the astounding performance of the emerging countries, particularly China and India.
Carbon-dioxide emissions have been growing fast, fossil-fuel resources are being depleted rapidly, and global warming has accelerated.
Even if the US embraces the Kyoto Protocol under President Barack Obama, the world’s temperature will break the record of the last 800,000 years in the next 30 years.
Moreover, huge waves of migrants from developing countries to OECD countries challenge the assimilation capacity of the latter and deprive the former of its educated work force.
In the US and Germany, 13% of the population is foreign born, as are 8% of France inhabitants and 10% of Britain’s.
Unskilled migrants tend to come to Europe, where they burden the welfare state, and skilled migrants are lured to the US, although they are urgently needed at home.
The brain drain is a problem not only for South America west of the Andes and many African countries, but also for Turkey, Italy, Britain, the Balkan countries, Germany, and Finland.
Migration from developing countries partly reflects a problem that also triggered the current financial crisis: international capital flowed in the wrong direction.
In recent years, the US absorbed half the world’s capital exports, while China provided one-fifth of the total.
In 2007 alone, the US imported $790 billion of capital, while the emerging and developing countries exported $714 billion.
This made it possible for US households to stop saving and enjoy an exorbitant consumption level, but it stood on its head the conventional wisdom that capital should flow from rich to poor countries, where it can more productively be invested.
Since the world will not continue to provide the US with goods in exchange for dubious financial securities, Americans will have to leave their dream world.
They will have to brace themselves for an extensive period of diminished expectations that will last much longer than the next economic boom, and that will require substantial structural changes in the US economy.
In the next few decades, the biggest challenge for the world will be peace, because the changing economic power structure will require corresponding political changes, which the US, as the incumbent superpower, will not easily accept.
The situation is similar to Germany’s challenge to British geopolitical hegemony in the nineteenth century, when the German economy blossomed.
The resulting political tensions led to a second Thirty Years’ War that brought Western civilization to the brink of collapse.
It can only be hoped that the political leaders who shape the course of the twenty-first century will be wise enough to avoid such an outcome.
PARIS: Brazil's currency devaluation earlier this year, and its difficulties since in stabilizing the real as well as its stock market, have demonstrated the importance, if any new proof was needed, of financial markets and their volatile mood swings.
There can no longer be any doubt that investor panic can provoke economic meltdown, as it did in Asia and Russia last year, still threatens to do in Brazil and across Latin America, and may yet stage an encore in Asia over worries about a devaluation in China and the spiral of competitive devaluations that could follow.
Now in its eighth year, the almost obscene economic growth in the United States could be used to illustrate the inverse proposition.
On at least two occasions in 1998, bad news could have set off a crash in American stock prices and an economic recession.
After all, the majority of observers (analysts, too) had concluded that Wall Street was overvalued, even before the onset of the Asian crisis.
Stock prices did, of course, decrease as a result of the Asian panic and its financial ramifications, but America's stock markets have since then recouped all of their initial losses and even moved on to new record highs.
The impeachment trial in the US Senate of President Clinton and the political crisis that could have amplified both political and economic uncertainty, leading to another sharp fall in prices on Wall Street, also had absolutely no effect on Americans and how they spend and save their money.
Could the American public's faith in Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, America's central bank, be a satisfactory explanation?
He's done a solid job, but I doubt that this can be the only cause of American buoyancy.
In Europe, the advent of the Euro has certainly not invigorated economic growth, and does not look likely to do so anytime soon.
The best news of the year is that, at long last, the Continent's consumers seem to be emerging from their long depression.
In contrast to the United States, however, the boost in consumer demand has not become an engine of growth.
Probably because the macroeconomic policies of Europe's governments were, and remain, overly cautious and have not dared provide the necessary kick-start.
Having satisfied the Maastricht criteria, fiscal policies have been geared to putting on brakes.
Across "euroland" monetary policy was focused on the harmonization of interest rates, not on their level.
So there is little reason to be terribly optimistic for the near future, neither for growth nor job creation.
Europe's relatively newfound fiscal discipline probably was a blessing in maintaining market confidence, and thus in immunizing the Continent, during the Asian, Russian, and Brazilian financial panics.
In Japan, sad to say, that sort of fiscal austerity remains something of a curse.
Sad to say, Japan continues to teach us that some of history's most painful episodes do repeat themselves.
A series of vicious cycles that one had hoped had vanished with the end of the Great Depression have shown themselves to be relevant today.
Deflation increased real interest rates and curbed economic activity, thereby setting off another round of deflation, and so on.
With interest rates reaching almost zero, this liquidity trap has paralyzed Japan's monetary policy.
Keynesian remedies (now being tardily applied) and an expansionary fiscal policy have not been able to jump-start the Japanese economy and bring about a return of optimism.
Is it because the Japanese government delayed action for too long before accepting budget deficits?
In all cases, they have been at the center of today's economic successes and failures.
Why has, say, Poland been relatively immune to the panic caused by Russia while the rest of Eastern Europe caught cold?
Is there a macroeconomic policy that could boost the still shaky optimism of consumers?
How can Japan restore optimism and jump-start its economic engine with no macroeconomic tools left to use?
CAMBRIDGE – Because traditional financial services are not designed for small depositors and borrowers, several non-traditional models have been able to scale up rapidly in this untapped market.
But, without a strategic policy roadmap to guide further financial-technology (fintech) development, these new “connector” models will remain limited in terms of the services they can provide.
In Kenya, the success of M-Pesa, a mobile payments app, has been nothing short of transformational.
It took PayPal two NASDAQ listings and almost two decades operating in the world’s largest economy to reach 188 million active customers and $282 billion in annual payments.
Although M-Pesa has been operating for less than a decade in a much lower-income market, it had nearly 17 million active users conducting more than $50 billion in cashless transactions last year.
Similarly, bKash now dominates the payments system in Bangladesh to such a degree that “bKashing” has become common Bengali parlance, just as “Xeroxing,” “Hoovering,” and “Googling” are in English.
Other models, such as Microensure and Bima, have also gained ground, offering micro-insurance solutions in emerging countries.
Jan Dhan Yojana, a high-priority Indian federal-government program that provides access to the banking sector for the poor, has enabled 250 million new bank accounts to be opened in less than two years.
New fintech products will have to clear several hurdles to move beyond just improving access to financial services.
Services fostering financial-inclusion must deliver a high volume of low-value output, which means they often have to rely on partnerships to meet certain consumer demands.
For example, Microensure and Bima have made insurance solutions available to millions of people; but their services ultimately depend on independent insurers to allocate capital and underwrite insurance policies.
Likewise, while there are green shoots of insurance-industry growth in regions like Sub-Saharan Africa, global insurers must constantly adapt to regulatory changes in their primary or home markets, and it is unclear if they have the capacity to expand meaningfully into low-income countries.
Four years ago, it formed a partnership with the Commercial Bank of Africa to add a lending tool, M-Shwari, to its suite of products.
But such accounts still number less than a quarter of active M-Pesa users, and M-Shwari still supports only small 30-day loans.
M-Shwari is not a core part of either partner’s business.
The most recent competitor to challenge M-Pesa is mVisa, a partnership between Visa Inc. and two other Kenyan banks.
With $400 million in 2016 revenues at stake, Safaricom – M-Pesa’s parent company – will likely focus on defending its core offering before it tries to introduce new products.
In Safaricom’s current list of new product priorities to expand financial inclusion, saving-and-loan products are ranked almost last.
Unfettered innovation and entrepreneurship are necessary for connecting the poor to the formal financial system; but, from a policy and development perspective, we need to shift our efforts toward improving the larger ecosystem to realize new fintech products’ full potential.
For example, M-Pesa’s cashless transactions are underpinned by cash contributed by its customers, which is held in trust at any given time.
Interest income from these funds is currently disbursed through the M-Pesa Foundation.
With a carefully constructed system, this money could be put to even greater productive use.
India’s Jan Dhan Yojana program has mobilized an estimated $6 billion from newly acquired customers, which could be used to provide additional tailored products.
Emerging fintech services can take a lesson from the Chinese e-commerce company Alibaba, which was quick in leveraging its payments platform, Alipay.
After Alibaba launched its money market fund, Yu’e Bao, in June 2013, it began reinvesting its Alipay customers’ unproductive micro-deposits.
By the end of 2015, the Yu’e Bao fund manager was overseeing $165 billion in assets and had converted Alipay’s millions of small, financially unsophisticated savers into investors collecting respectable returns.
To develop its platform, Alibaba relied on big data to manage the fund’s unique liquidity dynamics; and it benefited from China’s unsettled regulatory framework, though this could change in the future.
The Chinese context may be unique; and, indeed, there are growing concerns about risks inherent in the Yu’e Bao model.
But regulators and fintech firms should take note of examples like Alipay to develop rational strategic possibilities for this emerging sector.
Most important, they should remember that access to finance is not an end in itself, but a means to improve one’s lot.
A recent Indian Express investigation revealed what can happen when access to financial services is provided in a vacuum.
The paper found several instances where officials at Indian public-sector banks were depositing one rupee into customer accounts without customers’ knowledge.
These officials were apparently under pressure to reduce the number of zero-balance accounts, all of which, it turns out, were related to the Jan Dhan Yojana program.
Similar chicanery, we now know, was a routine practice at the US bank Wells Fargo.
The difference is that customers at the bottom of the pyramid have few banking alternatives.
Financial-services access is a much needed start, but it must lead somewhere.
NEW YORK: Britain's law lords will begin to decide this week (after botching the first attempt) whether General Augusto Pinochet should continue to be detained for possible extradition to Spain.
The case has inspired many debates over amnesties such as that which Pinochet decreed for himself decades ago.
Some commentators, ranging from the liberal Polish ex-dissident Adam Michnik to ultra-conservative US Senator Jesse Helms, oppose prosecuting Pinochet on the ground that, unless such dictators are allowed to retire with their impunity intact, it will be impossible to persuade them to relinquish power.
In Pinochet’s case, there is an ahistorical aspect to this argument.
After seizing power in September 1973, torturing and murdering thousands in the process of consolidating his rule, Pinochet needed to establish his legitimacy, domestically and internationally.
So the dictator promulgated a Constitution in 1980 which required that his continuation as President be subject to a plebiscite eight years later.
That plebiscite was scheduled for October 5, 1988, fifteen years after Pinochet’s coup.
As the date of the plebiscite approached, it became apparent that they were likely to prevail.
Signs appeared that Pinochet was planning to abort the plebiscite.
To prevent this, the American State Department summoned the Chilean Ambassador, issued a stern warning to Pinochet, and announced publicly its demand that the plebiscite be held as planned.
Early returns (not publicly reported) indicated that Pinochet had been defeated.
However, his fellow military commanders insisted on compliance with Pinochet's own Constitution, forcing the General to back down from a demand for emergency powers to set aside the results.
When the ballot counting was completed, Pinochet's continuation had been rejected by a margin of 55% to 43% (the remaining votes were blank or invalid).
A year-and-a-half later, Pinochet stepped down.
Though it is not often the case that severely repressive regimes go of their own volition or through a negotiated transfer of power, it does happen.
Perhaps the outstanding example of a peaceful transition made possible by a guarantee of non-prosecution is South Africa.
There, even many of the most dedicated opponents of apartheid favored the provision of the 1993 Temporary Constitution that required an amnesty.
Without amnesty, it was widely accepted, whites would fight to keep power, leading to all out war.
South Africa made the best of amnesty by not providing it collectively, but only individually to those on both sides of the struggle who acknowledged and disclosed their crimes.
Even so, amnesty allowed many people with blood on their hands to escape punishment in the interest of avoiding greater bloodshed.
It is difficult to quarrel with those who made the decision in South Africa to accept an amnesty.
Yet there are compelling arguments to call a halt to the practice, inaugurated by Pinochet in 1978 and copied by military regimes in several other Latin American countries, to protect themselves by issuing amnesties for their own crimes.
A crucial factor in many countries that facilitates the commission of great crimes is the belief by the perpetrators that they will never be held accountable.
Amnesties allowed the development of what is often called a culture of impunity.
It is high time to signify the end of the era in which that culture prevailed.
Dictators who demand amnesty as a condition for leaving power are somewhat like airplane highjackers who insist on freedom for themselves and imprisoned comrades as the price for releasing hostages.
We know that innocent persons will die unless we accede to the highjackers.
Nevertheless, a consensus has developed internationally that yielding to such extortion costs even more lives.
Though we do what we can to save the lives of passengers, we do not give in to the demands of terrorists.
Whatever its outcome, Pinochet’s case demonstrates that the amnesties tyrants grant themselves provide only limited protection.
Another contributing factor to the culture of impunity is the difficulty in deciding how and where to try those whose crimes include the destruction of the judicial systems of their countries.
Here is a difficulty illustrated by the recent surrender in Cambodia of two Khmer Rouge leaders, Khieu Samphan and Nuon Chea, who claim that their crimes should be forgotten, that "bygones should be bygones."
Everyone seems to agree that Cambodia’s courts are unable to try them for the murder of millions.
On the other hand, there is limited enthusiasm for establishing yet another ad hoc international tribunal – in addition to those now at work for ex-Yugoslavia and Rwanda – because of the costs.
In years to come, when a permanent International Criminal Court is established, such problems will no longer present insurmountable obstacles and the significance of amnesties will be further reduced.
It will take another two or three years before the treaty for such a Court (adopted in Rome last summer) is ratified by the required sixty governments.
Thereafter, the Court will not be able to consider the crimes of the past, such as those committed by Pinochet and the Khmer Rouge.
The International Criminal Court’s existence will reinforce the message being sent by the proceeding against Pinochet: there are no statutes of limitations and there will be no permanent safe havens for those who use state power to engage in mass torture or mass murder.
Denying dictators a guarantee of impunity will only rarely figure in whether they depart from power.
KAZAN – Americans are great believers in the value of entrepreneurs and small business.
That faith underlies the JOBS (Jumpstart Our Business Startups) Act, a new law that will make it easier for small companies to raise money and bypass the regulatory “friction” that firms encounter when they go public.
The law assumes that people who can't find jobs may be able to find investors instead, and that small companies will be able to get the financing they need to grow bigger and hire more people.
Angel investors, friends, and family will boldly go where banks may fear to tread.
The JOBS Act is an extreme example of Americans’ belief in people’s essential goodness, and everyone’s right to self-fulfillment.
It is a uniquely American approach, and capitalistic in the best sense of the word, for it encourages (and democratizes) investment, rather than fueling consumption.
Small (under $1 billion) companies can raise money directly from small investors in a formalization of the “crowdfunding” approach, whereby a project’s principals post their plans on a Web site and ask for money, essentially opening up the initial public offering (IPO) market.
The theory underlying the law is that a new set of accredited third-party marketplaces, rather than the overburdened Securities and Exchange Commission (which missed Bernie Madoff’s monster Ponzi scheme), will ensure that entrepreneurs tell the truth, and that investors know what they are buying.
(Of course, that begs the question of how thoroughly vetted and reliable those third-party marketplaces and their vetting systems will be.)
While this initiative was born in the United States, many countries are wondering how to jumpstart their own entrepreneurial sectors, and may be tempted to follow America’s lead.
Unfortunately, the JOBS Act is as likely to be successful as the US government’s earlier attempts to ensure that American families could buy their own homes.
Low down payments, deferred interest, and other enticements made it attractive for people to buy their own homes (or to speculate with second homes) whether they could afford to or not.
Some were driven by an honest mission to expand property ownership; others were driven by greed.
Some knew that the people to whom they were selling houses could not afford it; others simply did not want to know.
The banks that originated mortgage loans sold their portfolios to investors who didn't really understand what they were buying.
In the same way, the JOBS Act will ease life for some deserving people – and most likely attract many more who are less deserving.
The new system will attract scam artists and promoters who will encourage unsuitable companies to seek investment and oversell the companies to individuals who can't afford to lose the money that they invest.
I wish I had more faith in the system, but the problem is not a lack of good people, good investors, or good entrepreneurs.
The problem is that, without regulation, bad people take advantage of the good ones.
While regulation and restrictions may hamper small business, not all regulation and restrictions are useless.
Yes, there are some wonderful, honest companies that deserve investment and can’t get it, but they are not that common.
Now the quality of even the honest start-ups is likely to decline as more of them are established, and they will spend more of other people’s money before failing.
For example, with more start-ups, it will be even harder for each of them to find management talent and the right employees.
Indeed, many people whom an entrepreneur might have hired will probably become CEOs of competing start-ups.
Meanwhile, all of them will be competing for a finite number of customers, and those companies that make progress will then have to compete for scarcer scale-up capital.
The best route to success in angel investing is to invest in, say, ten or more separate companies, so that you have the chance of at least one big winner.
But, again, a broader investor pool is likely to reduce the average number of investments per investor, with inadequate diversification leading to many more losers than winners.
The faith that drives the JOBS Act is the same magical thinking that drives many Internet phenomena: people are good and everyone means well.
But the Internet’s easy accessibility and low entry barriers have led to spam and malware and bad behavior; each new service starts out “clean,” but then ends up requiring its own regulations.
Just ask eBay, Google, or Facebook how much they spend on security, fraud detection, and the like.
As on the Internet, so in real life: sometimes friction has a purpose.
In the nearly six months since Hurricane Katrina destroyed half of New Orleans, many storm victims’ expectations of help have been dashed, creating a legacy of bitterness.
That legacy may be all the more painful when we consider that many homeowners suffered unnecessarily devastating losses because of their lack of insurance or their underinsurance, often owing to the belief that they could not afford the right coverage.
Future catastrophes – storms, earthquakes, tsunamis, volcano eruptions, forest fires, agricultural or other environmental crises, disease epidemics, or terrorist attacks – are likely to result in the same kinds of problems.
So it is important to consider the causes of underinsurance and whether our insurance institutions are adequate to the risks that we face.
According to a report from the Insurance Information Institute, nearly 70% of homeowners’ claims in Louisiana were settled by the end of January, for a total of $7.5 billion dollars.
Sounds good, but there were roughly 200,000 homes that were either severely damaged or destroyed, so the total amounts to less than $40,000 per home – far below what was needed.
Indeed, a large share of New Orleans homeowners – 60% in Orleans Parish – were completely uninsured against floods.
Many of those who were insured discovered that clauses in their policies barred them from collecting full benefits.
In some cases, insurance companies argued that houses were damaged by flood, not wind, which their policies cover more generously.
That may seem like capricious hair-splitting to people who have suffered a major loss, but such terms are in the insurance contracts that they signed, whether they understood them or not.
Claims disputes have led to many lawsuits, and many of those who have lost their homes have discovered that the only help available to them now is a low-interest loan.
Not unreasonably, President George W. Bush wants government grants to bail out only the approximately 20,000 homeowners who can’t be faulted for failing to buy flood insurance, because they lived outside the designated flood plains.
Despite the disappointments, private insurance is still the best way to deal with possible future disasters.
Insurance policies that clearly specify the amounts that will be paid and the types of damage that will be covered are far better than the government-administered, after-the-fact bailout that many people seem to have expected.
Adequate private insurance can be boosted in the future through public education, improved insurance institutions, and lower insurance costs.
We need to work on all of these agendas, because each must be part of any new plan to deal with the next catastrophe.
According to estimates by Robert Klein of Georgia State University, homeowners’ insurance premiums in Louisiana had already gone up by 70% between 1997 and 2005.
State insurance regulators resist rate increases, but they are ultimately powerless, because insurers can simply take their business elsewhere.
The National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) proposed in December that each of America’s 50 states should establish a disaster insurance fund to cover a wide range of big calamities.
The funds – modeled after similar funds in France and Spain – would be designed to cover the biggest, once-in-fifty-years catastrophes.
The federal government would then augment the protection up to the once-in-five-hundred-year level.
If it were fully implemented, which is unlikely, it would constitute a revolution in risk management in the US similar to that of the creation of Social Security in 1934.
Mega-disaster risks can be handled with private financial markets, as long as these markets manage to get the full attention and interest of portfolio investors.
Consider catastrophe bonds (or “cat bonds”), which contain clauses that stipulate that the issuer of the bond (the borrower) does not have to repay the money if a specified catastrophe occurs.
The bonds can be sold to a worldwide market by insurance companies that incur major risks by writing policies.
If the insurance companies can get a good enough price for such bonds, they can eliminate their exposure to the risk of a major disaster, thereby allowing them to issue policies to homeowners at a lower cost.
According to estimates by Lane Financial, there were $1.8 billion worth of cat bonds issued in the year April 2004-March 2005.
In the first three post-Katrina months alone (September to December 2005), $2.1 billion were issued.
But the trend towards increasing sophistication and breadth of our financial markets suggests that we can expect to see much further growth in cat bonds.
Ultimately, even Hurricane Katrina and other disasters of similar magnitude are small by world standards.
The total insured property loss of Katrina, $34.4 billion according to an insurance industry estimate, even if expanded to represent uninsured losses, represents a miniscule fraction of world wealth.
But such disasters represent a much larger share of a single country’s wealth.
This is why financial theory prescribes spreading risks as evenly as possible around the world, rather than around only one country, as plans for a national catastrophe fund envision.
The possibility of managing national risks globally is another example of the advantages of economic globalization and expansion of financial markets.
GENEVA – Geopolitical insight is often gained through real-life experience, rather than big-picture thinking.
Arriving at Charles de Gaulle airport in Paris from Conakry, Guinea, is a case in point: Conakry’s airport, located in one of the world’s poorest countries, outperforms France’s prestigious global hub in terms of cleanliness, service, and pride.
By amplifying such exemplars into a national project, Guinea could join the small group of commodity-rich countries that have bucked the curse of corruption and economic decay that often accompanies large natural-resource endowments.
History demonstrates the difficulty of avoiding the so-called “resource curse” – and that it does not plague only less-developed countries like Nigeria, as many assume.
In the 1980’s, the United Kingdom’s North Sea-driven oil and gas boom undermined the country’s broad-based economic competitiveness, while Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher’s government wasted much of the revenue on handouts that encouraged excessive consumption.
While a handful of commodity-rich countries have managed to buck the curse, including Botswana, Chile, and Norway, they have, nevertheless, failed to diversify their economies, remaining dependent on natural resource-based exports.
But history is not destined to repeat itself, and leaders of commodity-rich countries are seeking alternative futures.
Countries across Africa – including Ghana, Liberia, Mozambique, Rwanda, and Uganda – are showing early signs of success.
Zambia recently issued a $750 million inaugural ten-year bond at an annual interest rate of 5.375%.
Oversubscribed by 24 times, the issue will allow Zambia to borrow more cheaply than many European countries can.
Such developments reflect growing confidence in Africa’s economic prospects and, thus, in its ability to escape the resource curse.
Given unlimited time, less-developed commodity-rich countries would first invest in human capital and institutions, then direct their growing commodity revenues into infrastructure, and move on to diversify their economies by strengthening the agriculture, manufacturing, and service sectors.
In the real world, of course, such countries’ political economies demand short-term gains, beginning with basic services like potable water and electricity.
If governments fail to respond to these basic demands, citizens take to the streets, often destructively.
This summer in Guinea, for example, citizens’ frustration with widespread poverty and weak institutions, memories of ethnic persecution, and distrust of unfamiliar democratic processes fueled violent protests.
But, in many cases, the conditions placed on funding create barriers to investment.
The International Monetary Fund and the World Bank lead the chorus of traditional players eager to help, offering debt write-offs and concessionary finance.
But the stringent institutional reforms that they demand, while beneficial in theory, might not stabilize, let alone enhance, the development process.
Newcomers, most notably China, have become a ready alternative source of cheap finance.
But, in exchange, the Chinese expect business opportunities and, to some extent, political influence.
Sovereign-wealth funds, too, are increasingly involved in financing development.
But, despite being state-owned and subject to policy decisions, they function as commercial enterprises (with the possible exception of Norway’s hydrocarbon-funded state-owned investment vehicles).
Financing for the most expensive projects – implementing green-energy systems, building transport infrastructure, and developing modern cities – must come from foreign institutional investors.
But high-quality private investors are resistant to financing lumpy, illiquid investments in fragile, volatile states.
Those who are willing to engage often demand steep risk premiums that dramatically increase the cost of capital, often to usurious levels.
Global mining companies like Rio Tinto are increasingly working alongside emerging-economy leaders like China’s Chalco to support development.
As the most heavily invested, they have the most experience using cheap debt to create value.
But, with commodity prices beginning to drop, even the most bullish companies are reassessing ambitious investment plans – a trend reflected in the Brazilian mining giant Vale’s recent decision to put its investment in Guinea on hold.
Bucking the resource curse requires, first and foremost, strong, legitimate domestic political leadership, underpinned by effective institutional arrangements.
But it also requires a global investment community – public, private, and mixed – that can move beyond short-term thinking, ideological bias, ignorance, and cynicism.
After all, bets on leadership, vision, and earnings potential should not be limited to investments in California-based technology start-ups.
Guinea, which is making progress despite annual per capita income of roughly $450, exemplifies the potential of the world’s poorest countries to surpass expectations.
DAVOS – As the global economy changes at an ever-quickening pace, the labor market in many countries is not merely struggling to keep up, but seems to have broken down in important ways.
And, for many, upward mobility is beyond reach, even though the economy has begun to recover.
Four global trends are reshaping the world of work, helping to resolve contradictions and overcome dysfunction in the labor market as companies, workers, and governments adapt to a new demographic, technological, and economic environment.
In much of the world, aging societies and declining birth rates mean that the days of abundant labor are coming to an end.
Some 60% of the world’s population lives in countries with stagnant or shrinking workforces.
China’s working-age population peaked in 2010; by 2050, more than a quarter of its people will be over 65 (today, just 8% are).
In Germany, the labor force is projected to shrink by six million over the next 15 years.
As labor becomes increasingly scarce, employers and policymakers are being forced to think differently about sourcing talent.
In Japan, where a quarter of the population is older than 65, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has championed a major effort to bring more women and older workers into the labor market.
As a result, even though Japan’s working-age population, traditionally defined, has shrunk 8% over the past decade, the labor force decline totaled just 1%.
Aerospace companies, faced with graying workforces, have pioneered flexible working hours, phased retirements, “encore careers,” and a slew of knowledge-transfer programs to train the next generation of employees.
Companies that cannot find the talent they need in one country are using remote workplaces to employ people elsewhere.
And firms are making attempts to attract underrepresented groups, including women, young people, minorities, people with disabilities, and migrants.
At the same time, another trend, the rise of individual choice, is providing workers with unprecedented flexibility.
With millions of job postings just a click away, it is easier to shop around for work; most millennials expect to change course several times during their careers.
Rather than attempting to hang on to a job for life, the goal today is to remain employable – to develop the skills, experience, and expertise necessary to move on or up, regardless of the employer.
As a result, wages and opportunities are increasingly being dictated by skills, rather than tenure.
Those with sought-after talents have more bargaining power, are better able to manage their careers, and command higher salaries.
So far, this abundance of choice has discouraged companies from spending resources on training employees, who might, after all, soon decide to join a competitor.
However, as talent shortages loom, the need to retain employees could tip the balance back toward greater investment in professional development.
Automation, facilitated by better artificial intelligence, is poised to have a major impact on jobs.
Up to 47% of the jobs that existed in the US in 2010 are highly likely to be computerized out of existence in the next two decades.
If history is a guide, new industries and opportunities will replace those that are lost; nonetheless, the transition will be painful and could last decades.
Even as technology sweeps away industries, it is facilitating the emergence of new models that could help solve some of the problems in the labor market.
PricewaterhouseCoopers estimates that the five main sectors of the sharing economy – peer-to-peer finance, online staffing, peer-to-peer accommodation, car sharing, and music video streaming – could grow from around $15 billion in revenue today to $335 billion by 2025.
But it has nonetheless unleashed a torrent of creativity focused on the basic question of how better to align supply and demand for labor in a faster-paced world.
A fourth global trend evident in today’s labor market is the rapid embrace among technologically sophisticated employers of data-based approaches to human resources.
Talent management has gone from being an art to a science, as organizations have applied big data and supply-chain techniques to recruiting and retention.
With the proliferation of so-called people analytics – behavioral and intelligence tests, digital performance scorecards, and better information systems – companies know their workers like never before.
It is easier to see where the best talent resides within a company, or where the gaps might be.
Companies are using these data to think more strategically about how to source talent.
For example, given the difficulty of staying up to speed with changing technology, firms are increasingly outsourcing information-technology management to third-party experts.
This, in turn, creates new efficiencies, allowing cyber-security providers to monitor attacks against a wide range of clients and share strategies and solutions.
Recruitment is another area in which companies are turning to outsourcing in order to obtain expertise and increase efficiency.
The churning, difficult period in which we find ourselves will create new opportunities.
The growing realization that labor markets have fundamentally and permanently changed will spur policymakers, employers, and workers to address new challenges in ways that benefit everyone.
Big shifts are never easy, but when they are managed properly, they can make us stronger and better off.
LONDON – People used to think that the most important decisions affecting Europe were made in Paris, Berlin, or Brussels.
But in recent months, as the European Union has confronted the refugee crisis, and the Syrian conflict that is fueling it, Moscow and Ankara have come to the fore.
And the EU is divided on how to deal with its two disgruntled neighbors, Russia and Turkey, both of which feel increasingly snubbed by the West.
The EU-Russia relationship has long exposed EU member states’ varying historic, geographic, and economic interests.
While all EU countries agreed on sanctions against Russia after it annexed Crimea in March 2014, this temporary unity belies member states’ fundamentally different views about the kind of relationship they want for the long term.
Europe’s new cold warriors, such as Estonia, Poland, Sweden, and the United Kingdom, have stood up to Russian aggression; but Austria, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Slovakia, and other countries only signed on to sanctions reluctantly, and are more open to engagement with Russian President Vladimir Putin’s government.
Turkey is in a different category, because it is a NATO member and a candidate (at least in principle) for EU membership.
But Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan has been no less a source of division in Europe than Putin has.
In the past, Turkey was seen as a potential EU member state and a model for Islamic liberal democracy; today, it is mainly seen as a geopolitical buffer zone.
For countries such as Germany and Greece, Turkey absorbs Middle Eastern refugees, as well as the spillover violence from which they are fleeing; in other EU countries such as Austria and France, however, mainstream political leaders tend to criticize Erdoğan to attract voters from the political right.
This will make it more difficult to implement the deal – brokered by German Chancellor Angela Merkel earlier this year – that gives Turkey financial support, and its citizens visa-free travel to the EU, in exchange for its cooperation on containing refugee flows.
The coming weeks will test Europe’s resolve on both sanctions against Russian and the deal with Turkey, especially now that Merkel’s authority is waning.
A breakdown in these arrangements would cause a major crisis for the EU, which is already divided between north and south by the chronic euro crisis.
Both Putin and Erdoğan are leaders who have been shaped by their domestic insecurity and the need to project strength.
Europeans, however, have trouble maintaining relationships that pit their geopolitical interests against their desire to defend human rights and uphold international law.
In fact, the EU seems to have no conceptual framework for accommodating neighboring countries that aren’t actively importing its norms and regulations.
But the EU’s problem with both Turkey and Russia is about more than difficult personalities or inadequate policies; it is rooted in the European order itself.
When the Cold War ended, the EU and NATO were at the center of an expanding unipolar order that, it was assumed, would establish the conditions for European security.
Six years ago, Ivan Krastev and I wrote a paper for the European Council on Foreign Relations warning of the specter of a multipolar Europe, wherein the rules and institutions affecting European countries would not all be decided by the EU.
Russia is now as hostile to the EU as it is to NATO, and has created a Eurasian Economic Union to serve as an alternative regional unification effort.
Russia is also doing its best to hollow out from within European institutions such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and the Council of Europe.
Turkey, for its part, no longer considers its regional aspirations satisfied by its role as a NATO member or its EU accession candidacy.
Its own regional policy has changed significantly, from “zero problems with neighbors” to “zero neighbors without problems.”
But Turkey is now a critical player, because its geopolitical reach covers regions where the EU and Russia are both actively engaged – from the Balkans and Central Asia to the Middle East.
With Turkey’s accession process stalled and the conflict in Eastern Ukraine still raging, the EU is beholden to countries with which it has increasingly complex political relations.
There is much handwringing in Europe over the possibility that Turkey and Russia could form an alliance against the EU.
The two countries are still divided on many issues, from Syrian President Bashar al-Assad’s future to Black Sea security and the annexation of Crimea.
Still, the EU needs to develop fresh thinking so that member states can agree on how best to manage these relationships.
If it does not, it could find itself increasingly isolated and alone in a neighborhood where new powers have moved in.
From Eastern Europe and the Balkans to Central Asia and Syria, Europe’s periphery could shake its core.
BERKELEY – Back in the late 1980’s, Japan seemingly could do no wrong in economists’ eyes.
They saw a clear edge in Japan’s competitiveness relative to the North Atlantic across a broad range of high-tech precision and mass-production industries manufacturing tradable goods.
They also saw an economy that, since reconstruction began after World War II, had significantly outperformed the expected growth of European economies.
And they saw an economy growing considerably faster than North Atlantic economies had when they possessed the same absolute and relative economy-wide productivity levels.
The safe bet in the late 1980’s seemed to be that mechanization, computerization, and robotization would proceed.
Political and economic pressure would lead more Japanese sectors to undergo the transformation to machine-intensive, high-productivity modes of organization that export-oriented manufacturing had already undergone (and that sectors like agriculture and distribution had undergone or were undergoing in the North Atlantic region).
The Japanese work ethic would persist, the reasoning went, and Japan’s high savings rate and slow population growth would give it a substantial edge in capital intensity – and thus in labor productivity – on top of whatever economy-wide advantage it might develop in total factor productivity.
Moreover, proximity to a vast pool of low-wage workers would allow Japan to construct a regional division of labor that took full advantage of its high-paid, well-educated workforce and outsourced low-skill, low-wage, and hence low-productivity jobs to continental Asia.
As Japan equaled and perhaps surpassed the North Atlantic in terms of capital intensity, industrial knowhow, and standard of living, the global economy’s most highly rewarded activities – research and development in high-tech industries, high-end consumer fashion, high finance, and corporate control – would increasingly migrate to Tokyo Bay.
With one-third the population of the United States, Japan was unlikely ever to become the world’s preeminent economic superpower.
But Japan would close the 30% gap (adjusted for purchasing power parity) between its per capita GDP and that of the US.
The prevailing belief was that, by 2015 or so, Japan’s per capita GDP would more likely than not be 10% higher than in the US (in PPP terms).
Japan’s economy today is some 40% smaller than observers back in the late 1980’s confidently predicted.
The 70% of per capita US GDP that Japan achieved back then proved to be the high-water mark.
Its economy-wide relative productivity level has since declined, with two decades of malaise eliminating the pressures to upgrade in agriculture, distribution, and other services.
Japan’s export-oriented manufacturing industries have maintained their edge but have not attracted other high-end activities – in fashion, finance, or corporate control – to any significant degree.
On the contrary, since the late 1980’s, Japan’s high personal savings rate, rather than being a source of supply-side strength, has been a source of demand-side weakness, financing investment abroad and government debt rather than spurring a domestic investment boom that would boost capital intensity and labor productivity.
But its economic structure and level of prosperity make it look more like Italy than its counterparts in the eastern Pacific Rim – the US coastal states of Washington, Oregon, and California.
Seven years ago, prior to the global financial crisis, the overwhelming consensus among economists was that, in retrospect, Japan’s expected convergence in productivity levels to America’s Pacific coast was not in the cards.
And Japanese politics entrenched rural and small-business interests in a way that impeded the diffusion of export-oriented manufacturing.
Japan, the argument went, was too different in too many ways for the North Atlantic to serve as an economic-development model.
And the export-oriented manufacturing firms that had been stimulated and shepherded by the Ministry of International Trade and Industry were not the core around which the rest of the Japanese economy would crystallize, but rather a separate and walled-off estate.
Thus, the Japanese economy’s potential annual growth rate slowed by roughly an additional two percentage points at the beginning of the 1990’s, as the post-WWII development model lost its steam.
It was largely a fluke that this growth slowdown coincided with an asset-bubble collapse and a cyclical depression – one that caused Japanese output to shrink by about 10% in a few short years, followed by only a slow recovery to the new, lower potential growth rate.
But from the perspective of the past seven years, this clearly needs to be rethought.
According to all evidence, the US economy’s fall from its long-run growth path has left America 7% poorer today (and into the indefinite future) than expected back in 2007.
And this assumes that there is only a one-time permanent downward shock, with no additional slowdown in the rate of potential output growth.
Yet there are reasons to fear that there will be such a decline: slower growth means fewer competitive pressures for heightened efficiency; diminished risk tolerance means a lower appetite for innovation and experimentation; and nominal interest rates pinned at the zero lower bound means that society’s savings cannot be used effectively.
If a mostly well-handled bubble collapse in a low-inflation US economy could permanently push down potential economic growth by roughly 10% over a decade, is it out of the question that a poorly handled bubble collapse could, over a generation, leave Japan’s economy 40% poorer than it might have been?
One thing is clear: economists no longer dare to assume that trend is trend and cycle is cycle, and that their reciprocal interactions are small enough to neglect on the first pass.
That approach has left many economists themselves living in countries that are considerably poorer than they expected.
BRUSSELS – Memories of the twentieth century’s great conflicts, from 1930s pacifism to Cold War antagonism, are stirring again, motivating both Russia and the West in one of the gravest threats to global order and European stability in the past 25 years.
Indeed, the ongoing crisis in Ukraine involves nuclear-armed powers whose collective military spending accounts for nearly two-thirds of the global total.
Yet history need not repeat itself, so long as the West takes steps to avoid being trapped by any sudden escalation.
Russia’s military intervention in eastern Ukraine has placed it in breach of international law and in violation of the Budapest Memorandum of 1994, by which Ukraine surrendered its nuclear arsenal in exchange for a guarantee of its borders by Russia, the United Kingdom, and the United States, later followed by China and France.
Ignoring international law, Russian President Vladimir Putin has been sending an unvarnished message that only force matters.
Russia may be winning militarily and tactically in Ukraine, but its short-term success masks its underlying weakness.
The combination of low energy prices and Western sanctions will make it difficult for Russia to maintain its high level of military spending over time.
Indeed, Russia is even more economically and financially brittle than its Soviet forerunner; with an undiversified economy, and dependent on Western banks and technology, Russia cannot simply ignore what it does not control.
Given this, the United Nations Security Council’s three Western permanent members (France, UK, and the US), along with Germany and the European Union, need to appoint a single senior envoy to engage continuously and quietly with Ukraine, NATO and Putin.
The current “Normandy format” (Russia, Ukraine, Germany, and France) clearly is not enough.
The agenda for such contacts must start with enforcement of the second Minsk ceasefire agreement concluded in February, including adequate demilitarization and monitoring in eastern Ukraine, as well as agreement on a framework for local elections.
Russia’s concerns about Western institutions’ post-Cold War eastward expansion should be considered, even if they are not necessarily accommodated.
NATO should state explicitly that Ukraine will not become a member, while the EU should keep open the possibility of membership for Ukraine as an incentive for domestic reform.
Ukraine’s Western partners should also push for informal, direct contacts between Ukraine’s government and the diverse actors in eastern Ukraine currently labeled as “separatist.”
At the same time, the West should rally stronger economic support for Ukraine and its anti-corruption reforms, while ensuring that aid and trade go to areas controlled by “separatist” forces, too.
The Western alliance’s members, particularly in Europe, must implement their own reforms.
In particular, they need to reduce the strategic leverage that dependence on Russian gas supplies gives to Putin.
Doing so implies establishing a genuine common energy policy that pools risks, reserves, and infrastructure.
None of this is to say that the West should exclude the provision of military training and supplies; but it must do so prudently and to support a political process.
Neither Ukraine nor the West would benefit from escalating the conflict – a point worth emphasizing in view of the debate in US foreign-policy circles (and beyond) in recent months about whether to supply Ukraine’s government with lethal military aid.
What NATO can and should do – in a transparent manner – is scale up defensive military support for its members close to Russia.
The West would also do well to reinforce the economies and institutions of states in Russia’s “near abroad” against destabilization.
If Russia does not reverse course, emphasis should be placed on so-called smart sanctions that target individuals and specific entities, not the Russian people.
If the Ukraine situation can finally be demilitarized, and Russia has shown convincing evidence of readiness to address its grievances by political means, the West should offer Russia meaningful re-engagement.
This could occur through frameworks like the World Trade Organization, the G-8, and especially the pan-continental Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, which should be revitalized.
The Kremlin claims partnership with China, but China is stronger than Russia and shares few core interests with it.
Domestically, Russia’s “success” in Chechnya has been achieved by empowering a warlord who is not fully under Russian control.
The Kremlin should view the situation in eastern Ukraine – another unstable, militia-run territory that has already sent a flood of refugees into western Russia – as a similar threat.
Looking past the conflict in Ukraine, the West will need to restore its credibility.
Many Russians point to past Western military action – bypassing the UN in Kosovo, Iraq, and Libya, for example – as evidence of Western double standards.
China and other powers should be persuaded to support cooperative security arrangements and help Russia and Western countries de-escalate the crisis.
The challenge to post-1945 norms now playing out in Ukraine is a threat to them as well, and their engagement is urgently needed to uphold global peace and security.
STOCKHOLM/MEXICO CITY – Indonesia’s parliament has just taken a historic step, one that makes the planet safer from the threat of nuclear weapons.
The importance of Indonesia’s decision to ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty cannot be overstated.
This is a golden opportunity for the remaining eight countries to endorse the CTBT, enabling it to come into legal effect.
For the five decades following World War II, a nuclear test shook and irradiated the planet on average every nine days.
This era was ended in 1996, when the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly.
But, for the CTBT to enter into force, all 44 states specified as holders of nuclear technology must ratify it.
Until they do, the specter of nuclear testing will continue to haunt us.
It is urgent that the CTBT take full legal effect around the world as soon as possible.
A complete ban on all nuclear explosions would hamper the upgrading of existing nuclear arsenals and the development of new weapons, diminishing the capabilities of both current and potential nuclear-armed states.
The CTBT reinforces both nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament, and is essential for global, regional, and national security.
We applaud the fact that all of the nuclear-capable countries in Europe and Latin America and many in other regions in the world have ratified the CTBT.
With Indonesia’s ratification, the number of countries that have yet to do so has decreased to eight: China, Egypt, India, Iran, Israel, Pakistan, North Korea, and the United States.
These countries have a responsibility to make the legal ban on nuclear testing a reality.
We strongly urge them to reconsider the CTBT; this important instrument for peace and security will bring us a step closer to a world without the threat of nuclear weapons.
The CTBT has already had a dramatic impact, despite not yet being in force.
Since its adoption, nuclear testing has virtually stopped, and all 182 signatory states have abstained from testing nuclear explosives.
The three countries that have failed to ratify the CTBT and have tested such devices – India, Pakistan, and North Korea – have faced universal condemnation from the UN Security Council, and UN sanctions.
A key measure of the viability of any arms-control treaty is how effectively it can be verified.
The Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO) is creating a verification regime that has repeatedly proven its reliability in detecting even small underground nuclear tests.
In addition to its verification mandate, the CTBT monitoring system also helps to mitigate disasters.
During the tragic catastrophe in Japan last March, CTBTO data helped local authorities to issue timely alerts.
The CTBTO continued to help by monitoring the global dispersion of radioactivity from the damaged Fukushima nuclear power plant.
Over the coming two years, our countries will jointly oversee the process of bringing the CTBT into force.
· Call upon political leaders in the states that have not yet ratified the CTBT to act without delay and take concrete steps to this end;
· Encourage civil-society groups – NGOs, media, universities, and youth organizations – in these countries to urge their decision-makers to ratify the CTBT;
· Use national, regional, and international meetings and conferences to promote the CTBT at every level of decision-making;
· Complete the CTBTO’s verification regime, which all states should support as a powerful deterrent to any would-be nuclear testers.
It is time to end this destructive experiment and close the door on nuclear testing once and for all.
We appeal to decision-makers in the eight states that have not yet ratified the CTBT to move forward.
Why has the US stock market done so well in recent months--the Dow increased over 30% since its low on March 11, 2003, and closed above 10,000 on December 11--even with the media reporting one financial scandal after another?
We have seen Enron-style fraud from corporate management, Arthur Anderson-style smoke and mirrors from accountants, and now Putnam Funds-style market-timing irregularities from mutual funds.
The most important reason is a sharp improvement in corporate earnings, and in economic conditions in general.
The scandals may be pushing the boat of market sentiment downwards, but their effect is being overwhelmed by the rising tide of economic prosperity, at least for now.
To be sure, television, radio, newspapers, magazines, and Internet sites have been hyping financial misconduct, awakening and shaping the type of emotional responses that often have a powerful influence on financial markets.
But attention-getting emotions (such as anger) are not the only factors that drive investment decisions.
Investors may respond emotionally, but they are unlikely to let their anger cause them to miss what appears to be a substantive increase in value.
The excessive optimism of the late 1990's lingers, so investors are more impressed by the recent upsurge in corporate earnings--seen as confirming their optimism--than they are by the financial scandals.
Next to the $100 billion annual rise in after-tax corporate profits in the US in 2003, the scandals look puny.
Indeed, the scandals look even punier when one realizes that the list of crooked US companies, like Enron, is short.
In 2002, Harvey Pitt, the former chairman of the US Securities and Exchange Commission, made a dramatic call for CEOs of US companies with revenues exceeding $1.2 billion to sign their financial statements by August 14, 2002--and then be held criminally liable if the statements turn out to be fraudulent.
The world anticipated a wave of "restatements" of past performance by anxious CEOs.
But, of the more than 600 CEOs who signed by the deadline, not a single one admitted major error.
The major accounting firms have clearly established a culture of permissiveness towards earnings manipulation.
The 1990's saw an unprecedented rise in the number of quarters in which earnings beat analysts' estimates by a penny a share, suggesting that more irregularities could be discovered.
But the fact that earnings beat estimates by a penny a share every quarter is itself only a sign of quarter-to-quarter manipulations of earnings, not of their wholesale fabrication.
Finally, the market-timing practices of mutual funds that have been revealed to date simply don't amount to all that much in the broader scheme of things.
Eric Zitzewitz of Stanford University estimates that market timing has cost US mutual fund investors about $5 billion a year--less than 0.1% of the $7 trillion mutual fund assets.
This amount, akin to a modest management fee, is simply not a dominating consideration for investors.
(Some media accounts have made Zitzewitz's estimates appear much larger by taking them as a percent of the most vulnerable mutual funds' assets, rather than of all mutual funds assets.)
Paradoxically, the scandals themselves have highlighted America's strong regulatory system.
If anything, they are evidence not of widespread corruption, but of the vigilance of US regulatory authorities--which is precisely why the cases now in the news are the exception rather than the rule.
This vigilance is also reflected in the prompt legislative response to recent financial scandals.
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 has made it a lot more difficult to repeat the kinds of things that Enron and Arthur Anderson did.
The US House of Representatives has passed a reform bill that would prevent mutual-fund market-timing abuses.
The SEC's fiscal 2004 budget set by the House spending bill is $811 million, roughly twice as much as it was before the scandals surfaced.
Investors also see that the US regulatory system is stronger than the SEC alone.
Revelations of malfeasance have also come from the governments of New York (Attorney General Elliott Spitzer) and Massachusetts (Secretary of the Commonwealth William Galvin).
These states have set a standard for action, and there are 48 more states that could do the same.
So investors know that even if a Federal agency like the SEC overlooks or ignores serious regulatory problems, another regulator might step in.
The best evidence for continuing confidence in the integrity of US securities markets comes from foreign investors, who would be among the first to flee if they feared rampant corporate fraud and inadequate regulation.
Being removed from the US, they should be highly sensitive to any whiff of information that their money may not be safe there.
But net foreign purchases of US stocks for the first ten months of 2003 are still positive (although down about 90% from the same period of 2000, the bubble-peak year).
In short, most investors--while not always the most rational species--do know a good thing when they see it.
The market may not value US stocks perfectly, but it is not irrational to believe that the corporate scandals are not a major factor.
SANTA BARBARA – For nearly a century, the US dollar has been viewed as the financial world’s ultimate safe haven.
No other currency has promised the same degree of security and liquidity for accumulated wealth.
In past times of trouble, skittish investors and prudent central banks have all piled into dollar-denominated assets, not least US Treasury bonds.
US President Donald Trump’s chaotic administration has severely undermined confidence in the greenback.
Since being inaugurated before a phantom crowd of millions, Trump has picked fights with one government after another, including allies like Australia and Germany.
More recently, he has taken the world to the brink of nuclear war by locking horns with North Korean dictator Kim Jong-un.
Will global investors continue to put their money in a country whose leader loudly provokes the Hermit Kingdom with threats of “fire and fury,” or will they find financial refuge elsewhere?
Not since World War II has the safety of the dollar been in such doubt.
In the post-war period, America’s extraordinarily large and well-developed financial markets promised unparalleled liquidity.
And because the US was the dominant military power, it could ensure geopolitical security, too.
No country was in a better position to supply safe and flexible investment-grade assets on the scale the global financial system required.
As New York investment strategist Kathy A. Jones told the New York Times in May 2012, “When people are worried, all roads lead to Treasuries.”
The bursting of the US real-estate bubble in 2007 is a case in point.
Everyone knew that the financial crisis and ensuing recession had started in the US, and that the country was to blame for a near-collapse of the global economy.
And yet, even at the height of the crisis, a tidal wave of capital flowed into US markets, enabling the US Federal Reserve and Department of the Treasury to implement their response.
In the last three months of 2008 alone, net US-asset purchases topped $500 billion dollars – three times more than what was purchased in the preceding nine months.
The Treasury-bond market stood out as one of the few financial sectors that was still operating smoothly.
Even after the credit-rating agency Standard & Poor’s downgraded Treasury securities in response to a brief US government shutdown in mid-2011, outside investors continued to acquire dollars.
Much of the spike in demand for dollars ten years ago could be attributed to sheer fear: no one knew how bad things might get.
The same could be said of the US and North Korea’s escalating confrontation today.
At this point, fear of a new crisis could precipitate capital flight away from the dollar, at which point the US would have to deal with a dollar crisis in addition to a potential military conflict.
Risk of a dollar crisis seemed minimal in the weeks immediately following Trump’s surprising electoral victory last November.
In fact, by the end of last year, capital inflows had pushed the dollar up to levels not seen in more than a decade, owing to expectations of large-scale deregulation, tax cuts, and fiscal stimulus in the form of infrastructure spending and increased outlays for America’s supposedly “depleted” military.
But with the Trump administration now engulfed by scandals, the post-election “Trump bump” has faded, along with faith in the dollar.
In the administration’s first 200 days, the dollar has lost almost 10% of its value.
While Trump has been tweeting nonsense, investors have been looking for alternative safe havens in other markets, from Switzerland to Japan.
This trend began before the US’s latest contretemps with North Korea, but it was only a trickle then.
Now, that trickle is threatening to turn into a flood that will leave the dollar permanently damaged.
Of course, the Trump administration might actually want a weaker dollar, and to let others assume the role of global safe haven.
But such an abdication would be historically – and dangerously – shortsighted.
The dollar’s popularity as a store of value confers an “exorbitant privilege” to the US.
When investors and central banks place their wealth in Treasury bonds and other US assets, the US government can go on spending whatever it needs to sustain its many security commitments around the world, and to finance its trade and budget deficits.
With his transactional approach to politics, Trump seems to focus more on the costs of having a global reserve currency than on the advantages.
But he cannot hope to “Make America Great Again” if he has to worry about capital flight, and he will not be able to enact his domestic agenda if he has to accommodate negative market sentiments abroad.
There will be nothing “great” about an America that has sacrificed its dominant position in the global financial system.
If Trump tests the dollar too much, he will probably come to regret it.
NEW DELHI – Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh, who has been in office since 2004, recently held what was only the second press conference of his current five-year term, which is rapidly approaching an inglorious end.
Betraying his yearning for approval, Singh told the assembled journalists that he hoped that history would judge his tenure more kindly than his political adversaries do.
On the contrary, Singh’s once-great Congress party is now at a political impasse, from which it can escape only if it frees itself from its destructive dynastic leadership.
After more than a half-century in government – much of India’s modern life as an independent country – the era of Congress dominance appears to be over.
Perhaps the clearest indication of the party’s decline occurred in December, when it suffered crushing defeats in four key state-assembly elections.
In Rajasthan, Congress won only 21 seats, while India’s second-largest political force, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), won 162.
This represents a massive shift from the 2008 election, when Congress gained 96 seats, compared to the BJP’s 78.
Likewise, in Delhi, Congress was reduced to just eight of 70 seats after 15 years in power, with even Sheila Dikshit, Delhi’s longest-serving Chief Minister, losing her seat to a political newcomer.
Only in the small northeastern state of Mizoram did Congress retain its majority.
This was an unprecedented rout – and does not bode well for Congress in the upcoming national elections.
To see why – and to determine whether the party can stem its own decay – requires understanding what has happened since Congress regained national leadership from the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance in 2004.
As the largest party, Congress became the hub of the newly established United Progressive Alliance (UPA).
But, in a surprise move, the party’s leader, Sonia Gandhi, declined to become Prime Minister, naming Singh – an academic and civil servant, with no electoral experience – as the UPA’s choice.
After nearly 40 days of melodrama, Singh was finally sworn in, though he had not won voter support directly in any constituency.
As one observer astutely remarked, “Where there is authority, there is no ability; but where there is some ability, there is no authority.”
Despite Singh’s academic abilities, his potential as India’s top politician was severely limited.
Over time, it became apparent that Singh’s government was worse than ineffective; it was doomed to fail, because Singh’s strengths lie in serving as an obedient and capable subordinate, not as an agenda-setting leader who acts decisively.
Consider his role in managing India’s economic transformation when he was the country’s finance minister in the early 1990’s – an effort that his supporters have often cited as an example of his vision and ability.
Last year, former External Affairs Minister Natwar Singh disclosed that it was actually then-Prime Minister Narasimha Rao, a shrewd and experienced Congress veteran, who pushed India’s economic reform and restructuring.
Singh, reluctant to do what was needed, would have achieved very little had Rao not provided a platform – and the needed political support – to pursue the government’s agenda.
Early on, there were intimations that Singh should neither be underestimated as a political manipulator, nor overestimated as an effective economic manager.
But Singh’s ineptitude as a leader was already apparent before the revelation of Rao’s role.
Not only has economic reform come to a virtual standstill since he took office, but he has also acquiesced to all of Gandhi’s demands, legitimate or otherwise.
As a result, governance, and thus the economy, has been deteriorating.
India has been taken hostage by an extra-constitutional body composed of NGOs, brought together under the National Advisory Council, which is chaired by Gandhi.
With the cabinet having become superfluous, the NAC’s decrees – including half-baked ideas inspired by the European welfare state – became policy.
As a result, Singh has presided over a sharp economic slowdown and soaring prices, especially for food.
Meanwhile, political scandals, financial scams, and other criminal activities have proliferated under Congress rule since 2004.
The UPA regime has effectively looted the country, and rampant corruption and a lack of accountability have decimated its leading party’s credibility.
Through all of this, the supposedly economically literate Singh was little more than a silent spectator, offering only denials of responsibility or trite remarks from the perspective of a political outsider.
And, while the damage that he has caused to Congress is for the party to solve, the damage that his aloofness has caused to the institution of Prime Minister is a problem for all Indians.
Manmohan Singh’s decade of disastrous leadership has been characterized by weakness and decay.
MADRID – Upon Albert Einstein’s death in 1955, the New York Times published a letter to the editor with a marvelous anecdote.
Shortly after the atomic bombs had fallen on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Einstein was asked, “Why is it that when the mind of man has stretched so far as to discover the structure of the atom we have been unable to devise the political means to keep the atom from destroying us?”
As a former student of physics in East Germany, German Chancellor Angela Merkel was able to confirm the truth of Einstein’s quip firsthand when she went into politics.
I humbly believe that I can attest to the same, as my own life has followed a somewhat similar path.
Just as I had done in Spain a few years before, Merkel reacted to the collapse of the dictatorship she lived in by leaving physics to embrace public service.
In her various public roles, and throughout 13 years as chancellor, Merkel has always maintained a methodical and reflective style that suits her scientific background.
But world politics seems to be diverging from that style, and increasing agitation in Germany has taken a toll on her standing.
Last month, Merkel announced that she would not be seeking another term as chancellor, and that at the end of this year, she would step down as leader of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU).
Merkel’s successors may well be worthy of filling her shoes, but there is no doubt that Germany and the rest of Europe will sorely miss her composure and steadiness.
The greatest blot on her record may be the austerity policies that her government promoted in the European Union after the global financial crisis.
Those policies increased inequality, deepened the divide between northern and southern member states, and slowed economic recovery.
Since then, populists – particularly the governing Five Star Movement/League coalition in Italy – have seized on the painful legacy of austerity for their own political gain.
Similarly, some blame Merkel for the rise of far-right parties, including the Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) within Germany itself.
After welcoming over one million refugees in 2015, Merkel became the bête noire of nationalist anti-immigrant forces across Europe.
Needless to say, however, there is a stark contrast between her advocacy of austerity and her decisions at the height of the refugee crisis.
In the latter case, Merkel put her own political future on the line to defend European solidarity at a time when other countries no longer seemed willing to do so.
In a recent address to the European Parliament, Merkel once again stood up for the EU’s foundational values.
She joined French President Emmanuel Macron – with whom she showed great rapport at the commemoration of the Armistice Day centennial in Paris – in his call to form a European army.
As both Macron and Merkel have made clear, such a force would not only be compatible with NATO; it would actually strengthen the organization.
Predictably, however, Merkel’s ambitious speech elicited scorn from Euroskeptics, who would much rather see the EU succumb to despair and political opportunism.
In light of her announced departure, some already regard Merkel as a “lame duck” whose legacy will now be debated in political obituaries.
Yet these eulogies are premature: there is good reason to believe that she is not yet done forging her European legacy.
To be sure, Merkel’s successor at the head of the CDU may not be closely aligned with her positions, and could inject more instability into the coalition government with the Christian Social Union (the CDU’s Bavaria-based sister party) and the Social Democrats (SPD).
But even under those circumstances, Merkel would have a few cards up her sleeve.
For starters, a no-confidence vote in Germany cannot succeed unless an alternative candidate wins the backing of an absolute majority in the Bundestag.
That has happened only once – when Helmut Kohl of the CDU replaced Helmut Schmidt of the SPD as chancellor in 1982 – and it would be extremely unlikely in a parliament that is as fragmented as the current Bundestag.
A scenario in which Merkel finishes out her term, staying on for another three years, should therefore not be ruled out.
And, liberated from electoral pressures, at least of a kind focusing on her directly, she may feel freer to pursue a more proactive foreign policy.
Recall that it was during his final years in office that US President Barack Obama achieved some of his biggest milestones in foreign policy.
In addition to restoring diplomatic relations with Cuba, the Obama administration concluded the nuclear deal with Iran and signed the Paris climate agreement.
Though President Donald Trump has sought to reverse these accomplishments, he has not been able to consign them to history.
For the EU, it would be healthy if Merkel were to continue revitalizing the Franco-German axis, thereby opening the door to EU-level reform.
In this day and age, it is abundantly clear that politics is more difficult than physics.
However, we would do well not to underestimate Merkel, and to heed another timeless Einstein quote: “In the middle of difficulty lies opportunity.”
WASHINGTON, DC – Over the last decade or so, productivity growth has slowed considerably in most major developed economies, even as impressive advances have been made in areas like computing, mobile telephony, and robotics.
All of these advances ostensibly should have boosted productivity; and yet, in the United States, a world leader in technological innovation, business-sector labor productivity growth in 2004-2014 averaged less than half the rate of the previous decade.
One theory that has gained a lot of traction lately is that the so-called productivity paradox does not actually exist.
Productivity growth only seems to be dropping, the logic goes, because the statistics we use to measure it fail to capture fully recent gains, especially those from new and higher-quality information and communication technology (ICT).
If prices do not reflect quality improvements in the new products, price deflators are overestimated, and real output is underestimated.
Moreover, the skeptics point out, standard measures of productivity are based on GDP, which, by definition, includes only output produced.
Consumer surplus – which is growing fast, as Internet-based services like Google search and Facebook generate substantial utility to consumers, at a market price of close to zero – is ignored.
Indeed, a recent review of research on productivity by the Brookings Institution and the Chumir Foundation confirmed that gains from new technologies are underestimated, owing to measurement issues relating to both product quality and consumer surplus.
But these two types of mismeasurement, the report continues, explain only a relatively small share of the slowdown in economic gains.
Furthermore, these lapses have existed for a long time, and they do not seem to have increased substantially in recent years.
Perhaps, then, we must look at the other component of the paradox: technological innovation.
Many have argued that the real issue is that recent technological innovations have been less consequential than their predecessors.
New ICT technologies, the “techno-pessimists” claim, simply do not bring the kind of economy-wide benefits that were brought by, say, the internal combustion engine and electrification.
“Techno-optimists,” for their part, believe that ICT advances do have the potential to drive rapid productivity growth; their benefits are merely subject to lags and come in waves.
Firm-level data show that productivity growth has held up relatively well for firms that are at the technological frontier.
It is the less technologically advanced firms, which are often smaller, that have experienced the major growth slowdowns.
This suggests that the problem may not be the technology itself, but rather its slow diffusion.
There is also a macroeconomic element to the decline in productivity growth, rooted in deficient aggregate demand.
According to former US Treasury Secretary Larry Summers, when the desired level of investment is below the desired level of savings despite a nominal interest rate of zero, chronically deficient demand constrains GDP and productivity growth, producing so-called “secular stagnation.”
But, of course, demand- and supply-side arguments are inextricably linked.
And, indeed, techno-pessimist expectations, which can lower expected profits, may be discouraging investment.
Meanwhile, excessive income concentration at the top – a situation that inadequate technological diffusion may exacerbate – contributes to excess savings.
Any strategy to address the problems underpinning low productivity growth – from inadequate technological diffusion to income inequality – must address skill constraints and mismatches affecting the labor market’s ability to adjust.
As it stands, workers, particularly from lower income groups, are slow to respond to demand for new higher-level skills, owing to lags in education and training, labor-market rigidities, and perhaps also geographical factors.
These factors, together with rent capture and winner-take-all markets, can entrench inequality and blunt markets’ competitiveness.
In most advanced economies and many emerging economies, investment rates fell sharply in the wake of the 2008 global financial crisis, and have still not returned to pre-crisis levels.
But innovation is often embedded in capital and needs new investment to spread across economies.
At the recent G20 summit in Hangzhou, China, world leaders emphasized the need to boost investment and accelerate structural reforms to enhance productivity and lift potential growth.
One hopes that this is the first step toward an integrated approach that addresses the forces impeding technology diffusion, undermining competitiveness, and exacerbating inequality.
We cannot know how new technologies will affect the world economy in the long term.
But we know one thing: the productivity paradox is real, and it is contributing to rising inequality in many societies.
MADRID ‒ The European Union has taken democratic integration – driven by the free will of its members, rather than military force – to unprecedented levels, securing its place at the forefront of institutional innovation.
But today, sentiment in the EU seems to lean toward “conflict," rather than “cooperation."
Some member states are touting their sovereign right to embrace unilateral action, even as they request financial assistance, while others are acting as mere creditors, ignoring the social suffering that the current debt crisis has caused.
To return to the path of innovative integration, the EU needs a new framework for public debate that underpins effective cooperation among partners and friends, instead of fueling conflict among seemingly irreconcilable rivals.
Overall, European integration has been a harmonious, ordered, and just process.
Less wealthy member countries benefited from tools like the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund, which provided considerable resources to enable them to boost their per capita income.
But protracted economic crisis has changed their citizens' perspective, with a rising proportion viewing EU membership as more costly than beneficial.
Not surprisingly, that change has fueled demands for more “national sovereignty," which populist parties, such as Greece's newly elected Syriza, have translated into electoral success.
All of these parties, whether on the right or the left, place national sovereignty at odds with the so-called “external powers," and seek to tilt the EU's political axis accordingly.
In this trendy discourse, sovereignty means “empowerment," and EU institutions are “undemocratic."
Sovereignty has thus become a particularly seductive concept for citizens of the southern member countries, who have increasingly come to believe that the EU's “rigid" structure has been imposed upon them.
Meanwhile, the northern EU countries are falling prey to a simplistic message of their own: that their southern counterparts are irresponsible spendthrifts who should be left to solve their own problems.
At the root of both beliefs is the fear and uncertainty generated by globalization, with citizens concerned for their security and unsure of their place in the world.
But there is no going back to a global order defined by isolated nation-states – even if one would not know it from the populist rhetoric dominating today's discussions.
Of course, EU members are sovereign states, and they negotiate among themselves as such.
But they are also interdependent, with each member's actions shaped by external factors.
This interdependence stems not only from a shared currency: it is the fruit of endless socioeconomic interactions that weave the EU member states into a dynamic web.
That is why a public debate that considers only two extreme scenarios – imposed integration or absolute national sovereignty – is misleading and dangerous.
It drives participants into opposite corners, setting them up for conflict – an outcome that should be avoided at all costs.
The EU should commit to continue democratizing its institutions, as it did when it gave the democratically elected European Parliament a voice in the selection of the European Commission president.
For their part, EU member countries should recognize that they, as sovereign actors, chose integration, because the benefits of pooling their sovereignty outweighed the costs.
The European Stability Mechanism, for example, is a collective project aimed at safeguarding the eurozone's financial stability, not an instrument of domination or confrontation.
The ESM's resources belong to everyone, just as one country's bankruptcy affects everyone.
When financially stable countries disregard the challenges facing their struggling counterparts, they are acting against their own interests.
Likewise, the economic transfers conducted through the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund involved sovereign, democratic countries.
And it was the sovereign governments of Greece, Portugal, Cyprus, and Ireland that requested bailouts from their European partners.
Greece has already received aid worth 117% of its GDP; in Cyprus, the figure is 55.9%, followed by Ireland and Portugal, at 45.1% and 46.6%, respectively.
Clearly, interdependency cannot be avoided; nor can the responsibility than it entails.
The idea that, when the going gets tough, an EU country can solve all of its problems by reverting to pure national sovereignty is an intellectual fallacy, a political chimera, and thus a source of considerable social frustration.
It is time for countries to abandon the notion that there is some magical form of sovereignty that will allow them to escape their responsibilities as EU members without incurring serious costs.
In the real world of Europe today, debtors cannot break agreements that they have made in exchange for aid, and creditors must recognize the need to continue contributing resources to the bailout fund.
It would also help if creditors understood that their contributions, like their decades of support to cohesion funds, will not impoverish them (by, say, depleting their public pensions).
On the contrary, creditor countries will benefit from more stable, solvent commercial partners for their exports.
The myth of sovereignty has been perpetuated for far too long in the EU, fueling dangerous nationalist sentiment and fear of the “other."
Member countries, beginning with Greece, must acknowledge that interdependency is unavoidable – and, indeed, desirable, if managed properly.
As Greece's prime minister, Alexis Tsipras, admitted recently, “Europe is a space for negotiation and mutually beneficial compromises."
Europe has much work to do to strengthen the multiple identities needed to avoid conflict.
Whether we are from the north or the south, from Germany or Greece, we are all European.
SINGAPORE – Hurricane Florence, which smashed into the southeastern United States last week, is the latest in a string of extreme weather events that has raised expectations for disaster preparedness.
With big storms occurring more frequently, authorities worldwide are responding with upgraded early-warning systems, better evacuation plans, and more aggressive sheltering strategies.
But the day is fast approaching when fires, droughts, and storms exacerbated by global warming will dwarf our ability to respond.
The case for reducing carbon dioxide emissions – and slowing the rate of anthropogenic warming – grows stronger with every new catastrophe.
The solution is clear: we must elect leaders who will take climate change seriously.
In the US, the next opportunity to do that will be the midterm congressional elections in November.
Three decades have passed since former NASA scientist James Hansen first warned “with a high degree of confidence” that human activity was making the planet hotter.
And yet, because too few people heeded his warnings then, everyone is paying a price now.
In the first nine months of 2018, the world has experienced a lifetime’s worth of “historic” weather events – from drought-fueled forest fires in the American West, Greece, and Sweden, to floods in Hawaii, southern India, and elsewhere in South Asia.
As Florence was tearing through the Carolinas, Typhoon Mangkhut was swamping the Philippines and southern China.
While Hansen’s warnings came when climate science was in its infancy, scientists today have connected the dots among CO2 emissions, climate change, and severe weather.
For example, researchers have linked global warming to extreme heat waves – such as the ones recently experienced in California, China, Japan, and South Korea.
Data have also tied the severity of hurricanes in the southern US to warmer waters in the Gulf of Mexico.
Hurricane Harvey, which hit Texas and other areas in 2017, brought 50 inches of rain in some places.
In Houston, authorities were ready for Harvey in part because of lessons learned from Hurricane Katrina, which devastated New Orleans in 2005.
That storm caused 1,833 deaths, while at least 88 were killed during Harvey.
In October 2013, residents of Odisha state were alerted early to the arrival of Cyclone Phailin.
Although Phailin did claim 45 lives, a storm of similar magnitude that hit the same region 14 years earlier killed 10,000 people.
Still, emergency management efforts will struggle to keep pace with the havoc wrought by climate change, owing to a dangerous disconnect between knowledge and action, even as the scientific evidence piles up.
For example, many economic advisers still consider climate-change solutions to be anti-growth rather than pro-growth – despite the fact that low-carbon solutions create new investment opportunities and jobs.
Policymakers are equally reluctant to champion meaningful changes – like carbon taxes or the elimination of fossil-fuel subsidies.
Even weather reports on television typically fail to mention climate change as an underlying cause of severe meteorological events.
But the gap is most glaring at the policy level, particularly in the US.
With the international response to climate change at a critical juncture, the Trump administration is putting the US economy on a path to higher CO2 emissions by reversing emissions limits for coal-fired power plants, encouraging higher fossil-fuel production, and rolling back support for wind and solar power.
To make matters worse, the White House’s proposed cuts to the National Weather Service and its loosening of environmental and zoning regulations will further impede disaster management.
As the world’s largest CO2 emitter per capita, the US has a unique responsibility to help solve the climate-change challenge.
When they go to the polls in November, they must consider the candidates’ policies toward climate change.
While domestic issues might be uppermost in voters’ minds, Harvey, Florence, and other extreme weather events have made global warming a local issue and placed it squarely on the ballot.
LAGUNA BEACH – There were quite a few disconnects at the recently concluded Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
Among the most striking was the disparity between participants’ interest in discussions of inequality and the ongoing lack of a formal action plan for governments to address it.
This represents a profound failure of policy imagination – one that must urgently be addressed.
While inequality has decreased across countries, it has increased within them, in the advanced and developing worlds alike.
The process has been driven by a combination of secular and structural issues – including the changing nature of technological advancement, the rise of “winner-take-all” investment characteristics, and political systems favoring the wealthy – and has been turbocharged by cyclical forces.
In the developed world, the problem is rooted in unprecedented political polarization, which has impeded comprehensive responses and placed an excessive policy burden on central banks.
Though monetary authorities enjoy more political autonomy than other policymaking bodies, they lack the needed tools to address effectively the challenges that their countries face.
In normal times, fiscal policy would support monetary policy, including by playing a redistributive role.
With political gridlock blocking an appropriate fiscal response – after 2008, the United States Congress did not pass an annual budget, a basic component of responsible economic governance, for five years – central banks have been forced to bolster economies artificially.
To do so, they have relied on near-zero interest rates and unconventional measures like quantitative easing to stimulate growth and job creation.
Beyond being incomplete, this approach implicitly favors the wealthy, who hold a disproportionately large share of financial assets.
Meanwhile, companies have become increasingly aggressive in their efforts to reduce their tax bills, including through so-called inversions, by which they move their headquarters to lower-tax jurisdictions.
As a result, most countries face a trio of inequalities – of income, wealth, and opportunity – which, left unchecked, reinforce one another, with far-reaching consequences.
Indeed, beyond this trio’s moral, social, and political implications lies a serious economic concern: instead of creating incentives for hard work and innovation, inequality begins to undermine economic dynamism, investment, employment, and prosperity.
Given that affluent households spend a smaller share of their incomes and wealth, greater inequality translates into lower overall consumption, thereby hindering the recovery of economies already burdened by inadequate aggregate demand.
Today’s high levels of inequality also impede the structural reforms needed to boost productivity, while undermining efforts to address residual pockets of excessive indebtedness.
This is a dangerous combination that erodes social cohesion, political effectiveness, current GDP growth, and future economic potential.
That is why it is so disappointing that, despite heightened awareness of inequality, the IMF/World Bank meetings – a gathering of thousands of policymakers, private-sector participants, and journalists, which included seminars on inequality in advanced countries and developing regions alike – failed to make a consequential impact on the policy agenda.
Policymakers seem convinced that the time is not right for a meaningful initiative to address inequality of income, wealth, and opportunity.
In fact, a number of steps can and should be taken to stem the rise in inequality.
In the US, for example, sustained political determination would help to close massive loopholes in estate planning and inheritance, as well as in household and corporate taxation, that disproportionately benefit the wealthy.
Likewise, there is scope for removing the antiquated practice of taxing hedge and private-equity funds’ “carried interest” at a preferential rate.
The way home ownership is taxed and subsidized could be reformed more significantly, especially at the top price levels.
To be sure, such measures will make only a dent in inequality, albeit an important and visible one.
In order to deepen their impact, a more comprehensive macroeconomic policy stance is needed, with the explicit goal of reinvigorating and redesigning structural-reform efforts, boosting aggregate demand, and eliminating debt overhangs.
It is time for heightened global attention to inequality to translate into concerted action.
Some initiatives would tackle inequality directly; others would defuse some of the forces that drive it.
Together, they would go a long way toward mitigating a serious impediment to the economic and social wellbeing of current and future generations.
BERLIN – Nearly 15 years after its launch, the United States’ war in Afghanistan is still raging, making it the longest war in American history.
Nowadays, the war is barely on the world’s radar, with only dramatic developments, like America’s recent drone-strike assassination of Afghan Taliban Chief Akhtar Mohammad Mansour, getting airtime.
But Afghans continue to lose their friends, neighbors, and children to conflict, as they have since the 1979 Soviet invasion, which triggered the refugee exodus that brought the parents of Omar Mateen, the killer of 49 people in a nightclub in Orlando, to the US.
America’s invasion, launched by former President George W. Bush in the wake of the September 11, 2001, terror attacks, was intended to dismantle Al Qaeda and remove the Taliban from power, thereby ensuring that Afghanistan would no longer serve as a safe base of operations for extremists.
With those goals ostensibly accomplished, Bush’s successor, Barack Obama, reduced troop levels in the country, even declaring a year and a half ago that the war was “coming to a responsible conclusion.”
But, with a resurgent Taliban stepping up attacks, the war has raged on, exacting staggering costs in blood and treasure.
One key reason is Pakistan, which has harbored the Afghan Taliban’s command and control, while pretending to be a US ally.
If there were any doubts about Pakistan’s duplicity, they should have been eliminated in 2011, when Osama bin Laden was killed in a military garrison town near the country’s capital.
Yet, five years later, Pakistan still has not revealed who helped bin Laden hide for all those years.
Meanwhile, the Obama administration has continued to shower the country with billions of dollars in aid.
The assassination of Mansour on Pakistan’s territory, near its border with Iran and Afghanistan, has exposed, yet again, the deceitfulness of Pakistani officials, who have repeatedly denied sheltering Taliban leaders.
Like the raid by US Navy SEALs that killed bin Laden, Mansour’s assassination required the US to violate the sovereignty of a country that, as one of the largest recipients of American aid, should have been supporting the effort.
The question is whether the US will acknowledge the obvious lesson this time and change course.
While Mansour’s killing may be, as Obama put it, “an important milestone” in the effort to bring peace to Afghanistan, it also exposed America’s policy failures under the Obama administration, rooted in the desire not to confront either Pakistan or even the Taliban too strongly.
Obama’s objective was to preserve the option of reaching a Faustian bargain with the Taliban – a power-sharing arrangement to underpin a peace deal – facilitated by the Pakistani military.
That is why the US has not branded the Afghan Taliban – much less Pakistan’s rogue intelligence agency, Inter-Services Intelligence (ISI) – a terrorist organization, and instead has engaged in semantic jugglery.
America took almost 15 years to carry out its first drone strike in Pakistan’s sprawling Balochistan province, even though the Afghan Taliban leadership established its command-and-control structure there almost immediately after the US military intervention ousted it from Afghanistan.
Instead, the US concentrated its drone strikes in Pakistan’s Waziristan region, allowing the Taliban leaders to remain ensconced.
The US has even made direct overtures to the Taliban, in order to promote negotiations aimed at securing peace through a power-sharing arrangement.
It allowed the Taliban to set up a de facto diplomatic mission in Doha, Qatar, in 2013.
A year later, it traded five senior Taliban leaders who had been jailed at Guantánamo Bay for a captured US Army sergeant.
What the US did not know was that the Taliban’s founder, Mullah Mohammed Omar, died in 2013 in a hospital in the Pakistani city of Karachi.
Omar’s death was kept secret for more than two years, during which time ISI claimed to be facilitating contacts with him.
Finally, last July, Mansour was installed as the Taliban’s new leader – and he was not interested in peace talks.
It was Mansour’s intransigence that spurred the US to change its tactics.
Instead of using carrots to secure Taliban support for a peace deal, the Obama administration is now using very large sticks.
But even if this approach manages to bring the Taliban to the negotiating table, it will probably not be enough to secure a lasting peace deal.
If the US is to succeed at ending the war in Afghanistan, it must do more than change tactics; it must rethink its fundamental strategy.
The reality is that the medieval Taliban will neither be defeated nor seek peace until their Pakistani sanctuaries are eliminated.
No counterterrorism campaign has ever succeeded in a country when the militants have found refuge in another.
While Obama recognizes the imperative of eliminating terrorist sanctuaries, he has failed to do what is needed.
Over the last 14 years, the US has given Pakistan more than $33 billion in aid and armed it with lethal weapons, ranging from F-16s and P-3C Orion maritime aircraft to Harpoon anti-ship missiles and TOW anti-armor missiles.
And yet Pakistan continues to provide the Afghan Taliban a safe haven within its borders.
A better approach would be to link aid disbursement to concrete Pakistani action against militants, while officially classifying ISI as a terrorist entity.
Such a move would send a strong signal to Pakistan’s military – which views the Taliban and other militant groups as useful proxies and force multipliers vis-à-vis Afghanistan and India – that it can no longer hunt with the hounds and run with the foxes.
Obama’s decision last October to prolong indefinitely US involvement in Afghanistan means not only that he will leave office without fulfilling his promise to end Bush-era military entanglements, but also that the US will continue to fight the war on the wrong side of the Afghan-Pakistani border.
Perhaps his successor will finally recognize the truth: the end of the war in Afghanistan lies in Pakistan.
NEW YORK – The election of the United States’ next president is surely the most important contest in the democratic world.
A bronze sculpture of the British prime minister had been in the Oval Office of the White House since the 1960’s.
Mitt Romney, his Republican opponent in November’s election, has vowed to restore it if he wins.
Then a White House spokesman said that the bust was still on the premises, just in a different room, whereupon the story changed once more: there were apparently two busts of Churchill; one still in the White House, and one that Obama returned to the British embassy.
One answer was provided by two of Mitt Romney’s advisers, who stated that their candidate particularly valued the “special relationship” with Britain because of the shared “Anglo-Saxon heritage.”
This heritage, they claimed, was not sufficiently “appreciated” by the current president.
When this bizarre statement, with its racist undertones, threatened to become a scandal, Romney quickly distanced himself from it.
But how else is his peculiar nostalgia for Churchill’s bust to be understood?
In fact, the phrase “Anglo-Saxon” is not often heard any more in the US, where the majority of the population has not been of Anglo-Saxon origin for a long time (which is also true of Britain’s largest cities).
When Americans use the term, it is usually to differentiate white Americans from the rest, which is not something that most Americans, least of all presidential candidates, would now choose to do in public.
“Anglo-Saxon” is more often used in a negative sense by the French, as in “Anglo-Saxon bankers” or “Anglo-Saxon conspiracies” (to keep the French down).
Just recently Le Monde had the wonderful headline: “[President] Hollande Defends French Foie Gras against Anglo-Saxon lobbies” (the reference was to California’s ban on foie gras under its animal-cruelty laws).
He talked about “the British race” or the “English-speaking peoples.”
The so-called “special relationship” between Britain and the US, certainly prized by Churchill, was not so much racial as it was a product of World War II – and a rather complicated one at that.
During the war, Churchill and Roosevelt shared the idea that once Germany and Japan were defeated, British and US military forces should act as global policemen.
They believed that the world would be safe from future Hitlers if it were, at least for some time, under the enlightened leadership of the democratic English-speaking peoples.
By the end of the war, however, Britain was too exhausted to police the world.
The country was bankrupt and His Majesty’s colonial subjects were growing restive.
The future belonged to the US and the Soviet Union, neither of which had sentimental feelings about the British Empire, let alone the “Anglo-Saxons.”
But the British elite, fully aware of their country’s decline, took the “special relationship” with the US very seriously, for it was the only way for Britain to feel like it was still a major power, unlike, say, France.
Churchill certainly saw it that way, but so did Tony Blair, who presented President George W. Bush with the second Churchill bust.
Americans, on the whole, have far less interest than the British in the “special relationship.”
He is the man whom many American presidents would like to emulate, not because of any racial affinities, but because of his allure as a wartime leader.
The US is the strongest military power in the world, just as Britain was in Churchill’s youth.
And, like British empire-builders in the past, US elites often claim a moral mission to remake the world in America’s image.
Churchill, in other words, became a symbol of presidential hubris in the US, even as the “special relationship” can be viewed as a symbol of British decline.
People tend to forget that Rudyard Kipling’s famous poem about “the white man’s burden” was not an ode to the British Empire, but to the US colonial enterprise in the Philippines.
Hubristic presidents contemplating Churchill’s bust in their office are prone to believe that they have been called upon to be “war presidents” – that they, like Churchill in 1940, must oppose the next Hitler.
So, when Obama decided to remove Churchill’s bust from his office in 2008, this struck me as a very sensible gesture.
A little less hubris would do the US, as well as the world, some good.
Whatever else he might be, Romney does not come across as a convincing war leader.
Yet he likes to portray himself as a tough patriot, and Obama as an un-American wimp.
Maybe Romney really is feeling sentimental about the “Anglo-Saxon heritage,” even as Asian power grows.
If so, nostalgia for Churchill is hardly a sign of American vitality, but more like a romantic rearguard battle, typical of a country in decline.
After experiencing three decades of unprecedentedly rapid GDP growth, the country weathered the global economic crisis exceptionally well.
But it sustains considerable economic imbalances, which are undermining its ability to achieve high-income status.
The question is whether China’s leaders – preoccupied with challenges like financial instability stemming from risky shadow-banking activities and a heavy burden of local-government debt – have the policy space to put the economy on a sounder footing.
In the aftermath of the global economic crisis, China appeared to be on track to complete such a rebalancing.
Its current-account surplus fell from more than 10% of GDP in 2007 to 2.6% in 2012, and it ran a large capital-account deficit for the first time since 1998.
Moreover, China added only $98.7 billion to its foreign-exchange reserves in 2012, compared to an average annual increase of more than $435 billion from 2007 to 2011.
But, over the last year, China’s imbalances returned with a vengeance.
Its 2013 trade surplus likely exceeded $250 billion; its capital-account surplus exceeded $200 billion in the first three quarters of the year; and its foreign-exchange reserves soared by $509.7 billion.
Meanwhile, the lower current-account surplus (as a share of GDP) could be a result of its increased investment-income deficit.
And, while recovery in the advanced economies boosted exports, persistent overcapacity, combined with slower household-consumption growth than in 2012, caused investment growth, though still rapid, to decline to its lowest rate in the past 11 years.
In principle, a country can run a current-account deficit or surplus continuously for decades.
Given that China remains among the world’s poorest countries, with per capita income amounting to less than $7,000, its position as the world’s largest exporter of capital signifies a gross misallocation of resources.
In fact, after running twin current- and capital-account surpluses persistently for two decades, China’s foreign-exchange reserves are poised to break the $4 trillion threshold, with the marginal cost of every dollar accrued vastly surpassing its potential benefits.
In this context, the continued accumulation of foreign-exchange reserves is clearly counterproductive.
Of course, rebalancing China’s economy will take time, and it will entail some risks and sacrifices.
But China’s leaders must recognize that the country faces massive welfare losses, and thus should be willing to accept slower growth in the short term in exchange for a more stable long-term growth path.
In fact, with a well-designed policy package, the duration and impact of the growth slowdown could be minimized.
A critical first step is for the People’s Bank of China to stop intervening in the foreign-exchange market, which would halt the growth of the country’s foreign-exchange reserves.
In other words, China should adopt a floating exchange-rate regime as soon as possible.
Although this transition would have a negative impact on China’s economic growth, it would not be nearly as dire as many seem to believe.
For starters, while it would likely cause the renminbi to strengthen, the consensus in China is that the current exchange rate is not far from the equilibrium level, meaning that the appreciation would likely be moderate.
Likewise, although renminbi appreciation would diminish export growth, the slowdown would probably not be dramatic, given that China’s export sector is dominated by the processing trade (specifically, the assembly of intermediate inputs imported from countries like Japan and South Korea).
And the accompanying increase in imports is unlikely to damage China’s economic growth significantly; it is more likely to complement, rather than substitute for, domestic demand.
Given that the liquidity flowing into China over the last several years was increasingly short-term capital aimed at exchange-rate and interest-rate arbitrage (so-called “hot money”), there may be a surge in capital outflows when appreciation expectations have disappeared.
To prevent large-scale capital flight from threatening China’s financial stability, cross-border flows must be managed carefully.
A flexible exchange rate dictated by market forces would eliminate the opportunities for currency speculators to make one-way bets on renminbi appreciation, thereby diminishing the stock of hot money that currently accounts for the bulk of China’s capital-account surplus.
Even if China’s current account remained in surplus for some time, the shift from twin surpluses to a more normal external position would boost the efficiency of resource allocation considerably.
For too long, China has delayed the necessary adjustment of its balance-of-payments structure.
It is time to make a change, even if it requires bracing for some risks.
An ominous new word has crept into the life sciences and biomedical research: “biosecurity.”
The term reflects a growing awareness that rapid developments in these fields offer the potential for great benefits, but that the knowledge, tools, and techniques that enable scientific advances also can be misused to cause deliberate harm.
Any effort to address this “dual use” dilemma must ultimately be international, since biotechnology research is a genuinely global enterprise.
The international scientific community has a key role to play in ensuring that efforts to manage the risks improve security and strengthen international collaboration to ensure non- maleficent use of scientific advances.
Professor Ronald Atlas of the University of Louisville and I recently presented a proposed Code of Ethics for the Life Sciences in the journal Science .
Our proposal what we need for a code and for its contents have both met with strongly conflicting views.
The scientific community increasingly recognizes that science itself is not a value-free activity and, therefore, the choice of what research to undertake and how to undertake it must be governed by ethical principles.
But there is still a nucleus of scientists who oppose that concept, arguing that there must be no restrictions on the search for new knowledge, and that ethical principles only become relevant in the application of that knowledge.
In our Science article, we speculated on scientists’ reasons for holding such a view.
But, as we noted, “even those who question the value of a code agree that research in the life sciences, including biodefense research, must be conducted in a safe and ethical manner.”
Bodies speaking out publicly about this need include the General Assembly of the World Medical Association, the British Medical Association, the US National Research Council, the British Parliament, and the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) leaders.
A code of ethics is needed because the power of science to result in harm, if it is not well governed, has grown vastly.
Society has entrusted scientists and scientific institutions to show respect for life, in particular human life.
Safeguards are needed to ensure fulfillment of that trust, in particular, to ensure that science is not used in the cause of bioterrorism or biowarfare.
It would underscore the importance of ethics reviews of proposed scientific research and monitoring of ongoing research, especially research involving humans or animals as subjects.
It can also establish a basic presumption of scientific openness and transparency, while allowing for exceptions when there is a real risk that scientific knowledge could be used to cause serious harm.
Moreover, a code of ethics could help protect “whistle blowers” who bring ethical breaches to the attention of the relevant authorities or the public.
In short, a code can help to embed ethics in all aspects of scientific research from its inception.
Although no consensus has yet emerged on a code of ethics, there is wide agreement among scientists that a robust public health system is an essential safeguard against biological threats, whether intentional or unintentional.
Security and public health concerns now overlap, whereas traditionally they had been separate areas that elicited different kinds of policy responses.
Strengthening the response to naturally occurring infectious diseases or poisoning is needed to protect against the deliberate misuse of science to spread disease or poison.
In short, promoting public health, biosafety, and biosecurity, on the one hand, and protecting against bioterrorism, on the other, are linked, complementary activities.
But contemplating potential new bioweapons raises deeply worrying possibilities that return us to the problem of how to ensure ethics in scientific research.
For instance, “synthetic biology” involves the creation of living material from its DNA components, so that we can re-engineer life in the manner of our choosing.
The technology making this possible will most likely become common within the next two years at a substantially reduced cost.
Safeguards such as a moratorium on such developments or registering the equipment needed to implement them should be considered.
There are ancient taboos on the use of “poison or plague” as weapons or for warfare, and doing so has long been stigmatized in many cultures and prohibited by customary international law and international treaties.
The taboo is the companion to the sacred: that which we regard as sacred we protect with taboos.
We have lost both concepts in relation to much conduct in our contemporary world, but we urgently need to re-find them in relation to the new possibilities opened up by the life sciences if we are to continue to respect all life, especially human life.
The challenge is no less than to prevent the life sciences from becoming the death sciences.
That will require complex, multiple, varied, and integrated responses from a very wide variety of sources at individual, institutional, societal, and global levels.
Above all, it will require integrity, honesty, trust, courage, and sometimes restraint.
NEW DELHI – In his victory speech to a rapturous crowd in Chicago following his reelection, President Barack Obama affirmed that America’s “decade-long conflict” in Afghanistan will now end.
In fact, this ill-advised war – launched on the basis of a United Nations Security Council resolution – has been grinding on for 11 years, making it the longest in American history.
At the beginning, the war was aimed at eliminating Al Qaeda, vanquishing the Taliban, and transforming Afghanistan into something resembling a Western-style nation-state.
With none of these goals fully achieved, America’s intervention – like every other intervention in Afghanistan’s history – is ending unsatisfactorily.
As the curtain drops, two developments will greatly influence the withdrawal process and the ultimate outcome.
The first is the management of the transition to Afghan control, which depends on an orderly withdrawal of American and NATO forces by 2014.
The second is the election, also to be held in 2014, of a new Afghan president – a process that needs to permit the United States and its NATO allies to claim plausibly that they are handing the country over to a legitimate government.
For Afghanistan, ravaged by war without respite since the “Saur Revolution” of 1978, the endgame will be even more nerve-wracking.
As the US military leaves, it will enter another period of political and strategic uncertainty, after almost a half-century of disorder and civil war.
A previous period of such uncertainty was the spur to Pakistan’s creation of the Taliban, which proceeded to disrupt Afghanistan’s (and Pakistan’s) already-fragile social order.
Today, almost three generations of Afghans have lived from birth to adulthood without having known stability and peace.
And, as a visiting American scholar/diplomat recently told me in a confidential conversation: “In the US, too, at least a generation of our children, from birth till the age of 15, have seen their country almost continuously at war.”
It is against this bitter backdrop that a new Afghan president will be elected and the withdrawal of forces carried out.
Will these two developments bring about a stable peace, or will Afghanistan succumb to instability once more?
And what consequences are in store for the US following this war without victory or defeat?
Last May, Obama declared that the US had “turned the tide of war” in Afghanistan, an eerie echo of Richard Nixon’s rhetoric as he withdrew US forces from Vietnam.
And, like Vietnam, will the US – exhausted and nearly bankrupted by the effort – see all of its supposed gains evaporate soon after it leaves?
After all, Al Qaeda, albeit weakened, remains capable of regenerating inside Afghanistan, where the Taliban remain dominant in the country’s east and south, as well as in neighboring North Waziristan in Pakistan.
As the US strategist Daniel Twining has observed: “Over the coming four years, US leadership…will be essential” for “the consolidation of a wide-ranging strategic partnership with India,” as well as for efforts “to prevent Pakistan’s many pathologies…from spilling over in ways that undermine fundamental US (and Indian) interests.”
Our primary aim is the restoration of peace and, if not stability, an acceptable political equilibrium.
Even if we did not incur the same costs as the US over the past decade – the hundreds of billions of dollars spent, and the many young people killed or injured – we have paid the price that regional uncertainty always imposes: lost trade, lost growth, refugees, and violence.
In the face of these costs, the overblown and sometimes clearly dishonest claims about the war are an obscenity.
This strategically myopic and militarily ill-conceived war was unwinnable from the beginning.
As a result, Afghanistan will remain what it was: a violent and ungovernable tribal melange.
Indeed, across the region, apprehension is growing that when foreign troops leave, Afghanistan will again descend into civil war, ultimately bringing the Taliban back to power.
That is why “bringing the troops home early” has become the prime objective of Western politicians who are engaged in the region.
The West needs to get out before the bloodletting starts again in earnest.
My fear is that we have not seen the last of Al Qaeda or the Taliban.
As a neighboring country, India would face disturbing consequences if they returned to power in Afghanistan, as would Iran, which would not sit idly by if sectarian strife intensified and the Shia became targets of a resurgent Taliban.
Other neighbors would also pay a price should the Taliban’s seemingly invariable return turn bloody, however immune they believe they are.
China, which has invested billions of dollars in developing Afghanistan’s natural resources –investments protected, ironically, by the US – would be certain to experience greater unrest in Xinjiang Province, home to millions of disaffected Muslims.
But the country that will be most affected is Pakistan, which faces challenges to its territorial and political integrity.
The territorial challenge is, no doubt, a mushrooming anxiety; an innocuous remark by an American envoy about the Durand Line, which marks the Afghanistan-Pakistan border, drew sharp retorts from both countries.
Afghanistan’s history of occupation by foreign troops and their eventual withdrawal has been repeated so many times that one wearies of repeating the tale.
With the US withdrawal, turmoil is bound to reemerge, and the entire region will again bear the consequences.
ATHENS – On September 20, Greek voters will go to the polls – yet again – in a snap election called by Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras.
The early poll was no surprise: almost a third of Tsipras’s colleagues in his leftist Syriza Party refused to endorse the bailout he had negotiated with the country’s creditors.
In a parliamentary vote on the deal last month, Tsipras, in office since January, was forced to rely on support from the opposition.
So was the international community’s sigh of relief after the latest financial rescue – additional money from Greece’s creditors in exchange for structural reforms – premature?
Will Greece, the twenty-first century’s “sick man of Europe,” persist in refusing to reform?
The underlying issue is whether Europe’s monetary union needs greater integration to manage crises such as Greece’s, or whether it can maintain the current approach, founded on national responsibility and sanctions for those who break the rules.
Germany’s finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, has suggested that those sanctions should include expulsion from the eurozone – something that was never envisaged in the European Union’s 1992 Maastricht Treaty.
Nor, of course, was it ever envisaged that Greece would face its current economic trauma.
Admittedly, the country’s economic performance after the oil shock of the early 1970s was poor, marked by slow growth, high inflation and unemployment, huge fiscal deficits, increasing debt, a declining currency, and inadequate infrastructure.
Indeed, until the mid-1990s, the government’s lack of macroeconomic discipline and its tendency to succumb to populist demands and vested interests accounted for much of the country’s economic weakness.
But entering Europe’s economic and monetary union was meant to induce the political system to pursue longer-term goals such as productivity growth and enhanced competitiveness.
During the period of Greece’s accession to the eurozone, from 1994 to 2001, its economy stabilized.
Both inflation and the fiscal deficit fell rapidly; businesses and consumers became more confident; investment picked up; and the government put in place an ambitious package of liberalizing reforms.
Annual GDP growth jumped from -1.6% in 1993 to over 4% in 1997 – and stayed around this level until 2007.
Hubris was perhaps understandable; but, as every Greek schoolchild knows, hubris leads to nemesis.
Excessive borrowing created a credit bubble, which burst when the global financial crisis erupted in 2007-2008, leading to the current social and economic catastrophe.
A fashionable view is that Greece did not fulfill the eurozone’s entry criteria and so falsified statistics in order to secure membership.
Greece’s budget deficit for 1999 – the year when its application was assessed – was indeed shown several years later to have exceeded marginally the Maastricht-imposed ceiling of 3% of GDP.
But this calculation was the result of a politically motivated statistical revision, initiated by the government that won the 2004 elections.
The political ruse was to change retroactively the accounting methods for defense spending.
Greece had been following the standard practice of registering expenditures when military purchases were actually delivered.
But an alternative accounting method could also be used, registering expenditures when payments – in accordance with front-loaded schedules – were actually made.
Choosing this alternative meant the transfer of substantial amounts of spending from the date of expected deliveries to the time when orders were placed.
The obvious arithmetical result was to inflate past deficits – including for the year 1999.
Accounting foibles aside, Greece’s real error was to forget – once it had become the 12th member of the eurozone on January 1, 2001 – the imperative to modernize the state through liberalization and privatization; instead, it fell back into its old bad ways.
Vested interests prevailed: business groups attempted to capture specific markets, and public-sector workers fought to preserve their privileges.
Taxes were evaded on a massive scale, and the welfare state was characterized by endemic waste.
In short, bad governance and weak institutions are to blame for the 2010 debt crash.
There was no counter-balancing move to increase demand by publicly funding infrastructure investment; domestic reforms were inadequate; and the creditors offered no substantial debt restructuring or debt forgiveness.
Moreover, debt relief is being considered; the euro and the price of oil are both – helpfully – weaker; and, despite China’s economic slowdown, international economic developments remain broadly favorable.
On the other hand, Greek society is exhausted by the huge sacrifices it has been forced to accept.
The political system has been strained by the rise of populism and extremist forces on both the left and the right – and now, as the coming election highlights, there is the risk of renewed government instability.
Other countries have gone through difficult periods and recovered (Germany, our leading creditor, is a good example).
Greece’s location, together with existing strengths such as tourism, shipping, renewable energy resources, and a pool of scientists at home and abroad, provides real potential for the country to grow.
That means that after the election (which is unlikely to produce a single political force capable of undertaking this task), Greece’s center-left and center-right parties must learn to collaborate in the cause of effective governance.
Just going from one crisis to the next will ruin the economy for decades to come – and will exhaust the patience of even the most sympathetic of Greece’s partners.
PHOENIX – You may have heard of the “quantified self” movement – the idea that you monitor your own vital signs such as weight or blood sugar, and then (ideally) adjust your behavior in order to stay healthy.
Sometimes I half-joke that the primary metric that I monitor is my email inbox count: When it’s high, I’m too busy and stretched thin; when it’s low, I’m on top of things and able to concentrate on more important matters.
So imagine my delight upon meeting Dave Troy of the company 410labs in Moscow last month; he was on the “Geeks on a Plane” tour of the former Eastern bloc.
Actually based in Washington, DC, rather than Silicon Valley, Troy is a throwback to the old days when the Internet had just emerged from a US government project.
His latest product, the cleverly named Mailstrom, seems almost retro in this age of social messaging: it helps you manage your email.
But, unlike some new tools that guess – usually inaccurately – whose mail is important to me, Mailstrom does an excellent job not only of categorizing my mail, but also of helping me to get rid of it by applying my own intelligence – and willpower.
It helps me do things that I cannot do for myself when I’m trying to sift through my mail.
It finds all the messages from a certain person, and then lets me handle them in a batch – delete, move, or even answer.
Or it finds all the Mediapost newsletters about mobile marketing, so I can scan their headlines, and decide which to delete and which to save for later.
And it rewards me if I delete them all by crossing that sender off the list (yes, I’m so easy to manipulate!).
Mailstrom does this in a sleek way, replete with numbers – selecting, counting, and sorting messages by date, subject, sender, social network, size, and so forth, and showing charts of the statistics.
Mailstrom shows you how many messages of each particular type you have; it ranks the frequency of subject lines; and it lets you see how many messages you have received and how many you have handled each day.
Mailstrom does not actually do anything to the mail, but it does let you see the hidden patterns in your mail so that you can concentrate your cleanup efforts more effectively.
It is amazing how important contextual information is to accomplishing tasks – especially the boring ones!
At the moment, after a few days in the WiFi-free countryside, I have 17 messages from Dave Farber, 15 from the Business Insider group (it catches some related senders), and 11 from The New York Times.
I just got rid of all the Times headlines in one fell swoop, leaving me with only 1,356 to go!
The other result of using Mailstrom is that it makes me more conscious of the emails that I send.
How can I avoid having my messages end up in the jumble of emails that gets handled en masse by someone else – abandoned, sent to an archive, or, even worse, deleted?
The first rule is to have a clear, unique subject line – “follow-up re BioWorks, deadline Nov.
12, dinner with Juan and Alice” versus “introduction” or “Hi!” or “investment.”
That leaves little chance of my messages getting lumped with someone else’s.
Even worse are subject lines showing that the person actually thought a little – but not enough: “From Tiger Haynes” – yes, it says that in the “from” field as well.
Or, in February, “Re: Re: lunch November 15” [of last year].
Although I cannot change the subject lines of messages that I receive (something I could do with Eudora and which I still miss), I can and do change the subject lines of my replies – though sometimes I forget.
Whenever something concerns a specific date, I change the subject line to, say, “13 December” and file the message under “December 2012” for easy sorting and retrieval.
Another lesson is to make sure that the primary point of your message lies in the first paragraph or two of the text.
(Don’t rely on attached files that the recipient may not open, or on graphics that will not load if the recipient is not online.
Busy people travel a lot and often check their email in trains, planes, and the WiFi-free countryside, where online access is limited.)
So, to the extent possible, include details such as dates, deadlines, locations, and requests.
I (and many others) have the annoying habit of replying to vague messages with a clarifying question, kicking the can down the road.
Many of my email threads consist of a long initial message, a short question from me, another long reply from the original sender, and an unsatisfactory experience for everyone.
Of course, if you follow the news, you know that kids nowadays are not using email; they communicate via social networks and text messages.
The social networks, meanwhile, are starting to create their own email services, which, of course, assume that your circle of friends lives within that particular social network (Facebook, Google+, etc.).
For many people, the value of social networks is that you don't have to answer everything; it is a group environment.
As social-first users start to engage in business, whether at work or for their own finances, purchases, and the like, they will have to keep track of their communications.
The typical email system is unstructured, but at least you can see it all – and some of the metadata (dates, size, sender).
By contrast, most social-network email is not just unstructured, but almost actively obscure.
Most messages have no subject line, and at best you can see a single message thread.
Perhaps those message services will change, or perhaps Google, Facebook, or Yahoo! (for example) will buy Mailstrom.
Regardless, the visibility that Mailstrom affords is likely to be widespread by the time the current generation of kids develops complex, transaction-based lives.
Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's announcement that he plans to dismantle Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip, as well as some settlements in the West Bank, has shocked and caught people off guard both in Israel and around the world.
Despite the way it often looks to outsiders, debates in Israel about the future of the occupied territories have never been confined to hawks and doves.
Like everything in Israel, the process is more complicated, especially where the hawks are concerned.
Basically, there are two species of Israeli hawks: call one kind ideological and the other strategic.
Ideological hawks view the occupied territories as an integral part of the historical Land of Israel, the homeland of the Jewish people.
For them, the territories are part of the Jewish patrimony, which is why they insist on referring to the West Bank by its Hebrew historical appellation - Judea and Samaria.
Not all ideological hawks are religious, although those who are base their claim on divine promises and prophecies.
But many ideological hawks are secular nationalists, and their jargon is similar to that of typical Central and Eastern European nationalists.
Former Prime Minister Menachem Begin and Yitzhak Shamir belonged to that category.
Ideological hawks usually come from the National-Religious Party and from members of the Likud.
They are inspired by the nationalist ideology connected with Vladimir Jabotinsky, who founded "Revisionist" Zionism as a challenge to the more moderate version espoused by Israel's Founding Fathers like Chaim Weizmann and David Ben-Gurion.
For them, given Israel's narrow and vulnerable geographic shape and continuing Arab enmity, controlling the West Bank and Gaza is not an ideological imperative, but is driven by security considerations.
For them, Jewish settlements in the territories are not a return to historical lands, but security outposts, aimed at preventing - or repelling from a better strategic position - an attack on the Israeli heartland.
They may be right or wrong in this assessment, but it is not an ideological one.
Ariel Sharon, who comes from a military background - he grew up in a social milieu much nearer to Labor than to Jabotinsky's ideas - is a strategic hawk.
For ideological hawks, compromises are treason: how can you jeopardize the historical patrimony of the Jewish people, let alone God's promise to Abraham?
Strategic hawks, however, are open to practical bargains and compromises - if the circumstances are right and if the security considerations justify it in their eyes.
With the defeat and demise of Saddam Hussein, the danger of an "Eastern front" against Israel has diminished.
Absent a Palestinian partner, and given continuing Palestinian terrorism - which Israel's harsh responses fail to quell - what Sharon appears to be doing now follows from his strategic-oriented thinking: set up an effective barrier, move some of the isolated and strategically untenable settlements, and wait for another day.
If one follows Sharon's statements in the last year, a clear pattern emerges.
First, he admitted that "eventually" a Palestinian state would emerge - something unthinkable for dyed-in-the-wool ideological hawks.
A few months later, he scandalized his own Likud party conference by stating that occupation is wrong and untenable - another shock for those who always speak of "liberated" rather than "occupied" territories.
Last December, he explicitly stated that Israel is headed towards unilateral disengagement, and that this would entail the "relocation" of some settlements.
Although this was still merely verbiage, it was novel language for a Likud prime minister.
Sharon's latest statements, though, explicitly specified the settlements to be evacuated; the Director of the National Security Council, General Giora Eiland, was appointed to chair an inter-ministerial Relocation Committee and work out plans for conducting the evacuations, including compensation for relocated settlers.
Shimon Peres announced that Labor will offer Sharon a parliamentary safety net; there is even talk about Labor joining a national unity government.
The test, of course, is not in the planning, but in the implementation of withdrawal, and the road is long and bumpy.
Sharon's timing may have been determined by his problems with police investigations into alleged corruption.
Yet anyone who would like to predict Sharon's future behavior should remember that unlike Begin and Shamir, Sharon comes from the military, and for him security - not ideology - is supreme.
BRUSSELS – The “Brexiteers” – those who want Britain to leave the European Union – argue that their goal would be virtually cost-free and have no effect on the United Kingdom’s global trade.
On June 23, when voters in Britain cast their ballots in the referendum on the question, they need to consider what is actually involved in leaving the EU – and how the free-trade benefits they now enjoy (and take for granted) could be maintained after Brexit.
Leaving the EU means that the UK would exit the EU’s Customs Union, which is the basis for cross-border free trade among the EU’s 28 members (and establishes a common external tariff vis-à-vis third countries).
It also means exit from the Single Market – the basis for the free movement of goods and services among EU members.
By definition, non-members of the EU cannot belong to the Single Market.
During the two-year period before Britain’s withdrawal takes final effect, there would be UK-EU negotiations on many points – sovereignty, the legal order, immigration, finances, and economic matters.
The assumption is that a crucial goal for Britain would be to negotiate a trading relationship as close as possible to the free-trade relationships that exist today.
The best result would be if all players agreed to maintain the free trade already achieved, with the UK setting a new external tariff on a duty-free basis, applicable to all comers.
This is what happened in the 1970s after Britain and Denmark left the European Free Trade Association: Free-trade agreements were negotiated among EFTA members and between them and the EU (or the EEC as it was then known).
But Brexiteers should realize that there is no guarantee that this would happen again – and, in any case, there would be complications.
While this solution would be good for the 45% of British exports that are sold in EU markets, it would reduce protection for British industries to zero.
Under the rules of the World Trade Organization, the same import duties must be applied to all WTO participants – which means that if Britain’s imports from the EU are duty-free, its imports from the rest of the world must be, too.
The alternative would be for UK exporters to accept the EU’s common external tariff, and for the UK to create its own import tariff, applied to all imports, including from the EU.
Because the common tariff is at a relatively low level on industrial and fishery products, this might not be an insuperable barrier for UK exports, and it would allow some flexibility in protecting UK companies from imports.
The potential pitfall is that any British tariff increase above the EU level would expose the UK to claims for compensation from third countries in the WTO.
The bigger question that the Brexiteers need to answer is how to secure a high level of access to the EU’s internal market.
This is vitally important for Britain’s service industries, particularly for the City of London’s exports of financial services.
There is only one precedent for non-EU members being able to negotiate access to the internal market equivalent to that enjoyed by EU members.
This is the European Economic Area agreement concluded with the EU by Norway, Iceland, and Liechtenstein in 1992.
In the view of many observers, including me, access to the Single Market through the EEA is no longer available.
The point is that such a deal would go against all the instincts (and rhetoric) of the Brexiteers, because it would mean accepting the EU’s “four freedoms”: not just the free movement of goods, services, and capital – but of people, too.
That would be hard to square with the Brexit objective of “controlling our borders.”
The Brexiteers would also blanch at Britain’s obligation under an EEA-type agreement to continue contributing to the EU budget.
But it seems unlikely that such arrangements would be possible in financial services and the major professional services (including doctors, architects, and lawyers), which are important for Britain’s competitors in Europe.
Indeed, it is possible that the EU would adopt a tough mercantilist stance: If you want privileged access, you should stay in the club.
The final consequence of Brexit is that the UK would lose its free-trade arrangements with third countries under the many trade agreements that the EU has signed since 2000.
There is no guarantee that the EU would agree to an interim continuation of free trade, and it seems certain that UK exports would face higher tariffs than its former EU partners in those third countries (placing British exporters at a competitive disadvantage).
It’s a big stretch for the Brexiteers to ask us to believe that the world’s most prominent leaders, European or not, have all got the impact of Brexit wrong.
In the trade debate, we have had the International Monetary Fund, US President Barack Obama, and the OECD – quite apart from the UK Treasury – telling Britons that a vote to leave would be bad for the economy.
It is not much of a reply to argue that the OECD is “in the pay of the EU” or that Obama is anti-British because he had a Kenyan father in British colonial days.
But when almost all projections point in the same direction – that Brexit would be hugely damaging to the UK – it is time to decide what is credible and what is not.
LONDON – It is easy to forget that defense and security are not the same thing.
And during peacetime, countries spend money on defense precisely because they fear for their security.
Since 2014, the security environment for Britain and the European Union has deteriorated sharply.
It was the first time since World War II that a major European power sought to redraw its own borders by force of arms.
In 1994, Russia agreed to defend Ukraine’s territorial integrity in exchange for Ukraine’s handover of the nuclear weapons it had inherited from the Soviet Union.
But Russia didn’t stop with Crimea; since then, it has waged a low-intensity unconventional war against Ukraine in the country’s eastern Donbas region.
Russia has also sent ships and warplanes to threaten the coasts of other Western countries, abducted an Estonian intelligence officer on NATO territory, and sustained an ongoing military buildup in Eastern Europe, the Arctic, and elsewhere.
Despite these deteriorating security conditions, a slim majority of Britons voted in June 2016 to withdraw from the EU – a decision that could fatally undermine the United Kingdom’s relationship with its European NATO partners.
Making matters worse, in November of 2016, Donald Trump, who has long expressed admiration for Russian President Vladimir Putin, was elected president of the United States.
Although Trump expressed disdain for NATO during the 2016 campaign, he appears to have been reined in by the many generals he has installed in top positions.
The Republican Party is in the throes of a deep internal schism that could end with the victory of its populist wing, led by Trump’s nationalist, anti-EU Svengali, Stephen Bannon.
If Bannon does manage to transform the Republican Party in accordance with his nationalist vision, and if the Republicans retain or regain power in the future, US security commitments to Europe will no longer be reliable.
Continued Russian attacks on Western political systems, or even an outright military attack in Europe, could go unanswered by the US.
Without firm US support, a politically divided EU would be increasingly vulnerable to Russian political domination.
At the same time, a politically cohesive EU would be a bulwark of stability stretching from the English Channel to Ukraine’s Dnieper River.
In the absence of US leadership, a stable and secure EU could thus become the most important pillar of the UK’s post-Brexit security strategy.
But the stability of the EU is far from guaranteed, because a smooth and painless Brexit may tempt other member states to also quit the bloc.
Some argue that this outcome is unlikely, because it is impossible, in practice, for eurozone countries to leave.
If a eurozone country even suggested that it might withdraw from the euro and the EU, the resulting capital flight would devastate its economy.
According to this view, the fact that two-thirds of EU member states belong to the euro is enough to prevent the EU from unraveling.
In reality, a number of important EU members remain outside the euro, including Poland, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Romania, and Sweden.
Moreover, under favorable circumstances, eurozone countries with current-account surpluses – such as Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, and Austria – could probably leave the euro without suffering catastrophic harm.
And lest we forget, Western electorates have demonstrated a unique capacity for self-harm.
Consider not just Brexit and the election of Trump, but also Catalan separatists’ game of economic Russian roulette over the past month and a half.
As things stand, the UK still seems to be politically incapable of abandoning Brexit altogether, even though that would be the best course of action for all involved.
But between the options of a “soft” and “hard” Brexit – in which Britain would leave the EU single market and customs union – the latter may have at least one advantage.
Namely, it would not further undermine European stability, which also happens to be Britain’s biggest security asset.
To be sure, a “hard” Brexit would come at a high economic cost for the UK.
Industrial supply chains would be disrupted, the construction industry would be denuded of its EU workers, the City of London would lose international importance, the pound would continue depreciating, and the public sector – particularly the National Health Service – would be stretched thin.
The EU, too, would incur costs, albeit much smaller as a share of its overall economy.
Despite the costs, a “hard” Brexit would, at a minimum, discourage other EU members from following the UK’s lead, thereby shoring up European stability and helping Britain maintain its national security, which may be the most important consideration in the long run.
But even more ironic is the fact that those pushing for it are the very Brexiteers who would like to see the EU fail.
They are convinced that their vision of a buccaneering, global Britain can be achieved only with a clean break from Europe.
MADRID – The European Union is in the midst of a far-reaching debate about its future role.
Now is the time for some innovative thinking – including about how to remove obstacles to implementation of the EU’s bold plans.
Many EU initiatives – from financial and regulatory harmonization to gender equality – make good sense.
But if they are to survive Europe’s crises, they must be supported by timely political decision-making, familiar regulatory frameworks across member states, and an EU-wide commitment to good governance and ethics.
Last year, Italian Prime Minister Mario Monti, with the backing of the four largest eurozone economies – Germany, France, Italy, and Spain – called for a €130 billion ($170 billion) stimulus package to improve competitiveness across the EU.
Similarly, the €6 billion package approved by the EU in August to help reduce endemic youth unemployment, especially in Spain, must be seen as a step in the right direction.
But, while the EU is undoubtedly willing to launch ambitious projects, it appears less able to implement them quickly and effectively.
Some governments have adopted new, rules-based governance codes, and are instituting strict controls to keep projects on track.
Ministers in France, for instance, recently set new governance standards by committing themselves to guiding principles, including transparency, impartiality, and integrity.
Yet one important aspect of implementation has received far too little public attention: the time, money, and effort that are wasted when a member state enters an election period and forces the EU to put a project on hold.
Policymakers must wait to see if new parties or leaders will assume power, and if so, whether they will commit to the projects approved by their predecessors.
First, the EU had to sit tight as new Italian and Spanish governments, elected at the end of 2011, pondered their inherited commitments.
More uncertainty followed with France’s change of government in May 2012, and then again with Greece’s inconclusive elections the following month.
This year, Czechs, Italians, and Germans have been, or will go, to the polls.
Such disruptions not only make it difficult to pursue important reforms; they also undermine popular confidence in the EU generally.
Last June, the Royal Spanish Academy (the guardians of the national language) added a new word to the Spanish dictionary: Euroescepticismo, defined as distrust of EU projects.
This expression surely would not have gained currency had Europe’s projects been given time and space to take root.
So how can the EU avoid the distractions caused by endless rounds of national votes?
As Europe defines what it stands for, let us also consider an audacious yet practical idea: synchronization of Europe’s political clocks, so that all of Europe’s national elections are held within the same year – or even the same month.
Simultaneous, EU-wide polls might then be followed by some four or five years of relative stability (depending on the agreed length of a parliamentary term).
This would limit the disruptions to decision-making, personnel, and legislation that seem to occur every few months, thereby allowing important policies to be implemented efficiently.
A common election calendar for all EU member states would free up scarce resources and focus policymakers’ attention more effectively.
As a result, it would maximize the benefits of vital programs, such as those supporting youth education and employment, and therefore strengthen Europe’s economic prospects.
This idea may not be completely original (the financiers Leon Benelbas and Kyra Hazou have aided my thinking in this area), and there are important counterarguments to consider (for example, such a scheme could be undermined by a national government’s loss of a parliamentary confidence vote).
But fresh thinking about the true effect of Europe’s political cycles might, at the very least, help the EU to regain its momentum and retain its relevance.
NEW HAVEN – With much of the global economy apparently trapped in a long and painful austerity-induced slump, it is time to admit that the trap is entirely of our own making.
We have constructed it from unfortunate habits of thought about how to handle spiraling public debt.
People developed these habits on the basis of the experiences of their families and friends: when in debt trouble, one must cut spending and pass through a period of austerity until the burden (debt relative to income) is reduced.
That means no meals out for a while, no new cars, and no new clothes.
But, while that approach to debt works well for a single household in trouble, it does not work well for an entire economy, for the spending cuts only worsen the problem.
This is the paradox of thrift: belt-tightening causes people to lose their jobs, because other people are not buying what they produce, so their debt burden rises rather than falls.
There is a way out of this trap, but only if we tilt the discussion about how to lower the debt/GDP ratio away from austerity – higher taxes and lower spending – toward debt-friendly stimulus: increasing taxes even more and raising government expenditure in the same proportion.
That way, the debt/GDP ratio declines because the denominator (economic output) increases, not because the numerator (the total the government has borrowed) declines.
For starters, people tend to think of taxes as a loathsome infringement on their freedom, as if petty bureaucrats will inevitably squander the increased revenue on useless and ineffective government employees and programs.
But the additional work done does not necessarily involve only government employees, and citizens can have some voice in how the expenditure is directed.
People also believe that tax increases cannot realistically be purely temporary expedients in an economic crisis, and that they must be regarded as an opening wedge that should be avoided at all costs.
History shows, however, that tax increases, if expressly designated as temporary, are indeed reversed later.
We need to consider such issues in trying to understand why, for example, Italian voters last month rejected the sober economist Mario Monti, who forced austerity on them, notably by raising property taxes.
Italians are in the habit of thinking that tax increases necessarily go only to paying off rich investors, rather than to paying for government services like better roads and schools.
Keynesian stimulus policy is habitually described as deficit spending, not tax-financed spending.
Stimulus by tax cuts might almost seem to be built on deception, for its effect on consumption and investment expenditure seems to require individuals to forget that they will be taxed later for public spending today, when the government repays the debt with interest.
If individuals were rational and well informed, they might conclude that they should not spend more, despite tax cuts, since the cuts are not real.
We do not need to rely on such tricks to stimulate the economy and reduce the ratio of debt to income.
Businesses are not investing enough in new plants and equipment, or adding jobs, largely because people are not spending enough – or are not expected to spend enough in the future – to keep the economy going at full tilt.
Debt-friendly stimulus might be regarded as nothing more than a collective decision by all of us to spend more to jump-start the economy.
It has nothing to do with taking on debt or tricking people about future taxes.
If left to individual decisions, people would not spend more on consumption, but maybe we can vote for a government that will compel us all to do that collectively, thereby creating enough demand to put the economy on an even keel in short order.
Simply put, Keynesian stimulus does not necessarily entail more government debt, as popular discourse seems continually to assume.
Because it is a collective decision, the spending naturally involves different kinds of consumption than we would make individually – say, better highways, rather than more dinners out.
Balanced-budget stimulus was first advocated in the early 1940’s by William Salant, an economist in President Franklin Roosevelt’s administration, and by Paul Samuelson, then a young economics professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
They argued that, because any government stimulus implies higher taxes sooner or later, the increase might as well come immediately.
For the average person, the higher taxes do not mean lower after-tax income, because the stimulus will have the immediate effect of raising incomes.
Many believe that balanced-budget stimulus – tax increases at a time of economic distress – is politically impossible.
After all, French President François Hollande retreated under immense political pressure from his campaign promises to implement debt-friendly stimulus.
But, given the shortage of good alternatives, we must not assume that bad habits of thought can never be broken, and we should keep the possibility of more enlightened policy constantly in mind.
Some form of debt-friendly stimulus might ultimately appeal to voters if they could be convinced that raising taxes does not necessarily mean hardship or increased centralization of decision-making.
If and when people understand that it means the same average level of take-home pay after taxes, plus the benefits of more jobs and of the products of additional government expenditure (such as new highways), they may well wonder why they ever tried stimulus any other way.
CAMBRIDGE – Health-care reform is the major policy issue commanding attention in the United States.
A crucial feature of the debate is the official estimate of the number of individuals who would lose their health insurance under the various plans that have been proposed to repeal and replace the existing Affordable Care Act (better known as “Obamacare”).
The prospect that repealing Obamacare would cause more than 20 million people to lose their formal insurance coverage, as the Congressional Budget Office has estimated, is understandably a serious barrier to legislative progress.
It is important, therefore, to understand just what that would mean in practice, and how much it would actually affect the health of those who lose their formal insurance.
The primary reason for the loss of insurance in the proposals to repeal and replace Obamacare is the projected decline in Medicaid coverage.
Medicaid is the joint federal-state health-care program in which the federal government defines who is eligible, stipulates which benefits must be provided, and finances those benefits based on a formula whereby states with low average incomes receive a larger share of federal funding.
People who qualify for Medicaid do receive substantially more care than those without formal insurance – more doctor visits, prescriptions, hospital admissions, etc.
They also have substantially lower out-of-pocket medical costs than the uninsured, including the elimination of “catastrophic” out-of-pocket costs.
As a result, they are also much less likely to skip paying other bills because of medical debts or to have nonmedical bills sent to collection.
If reform legislation reduces Medicaid benefits, the individuals who lose benefits would continue to receive free care in outpatient departments, emergency rooms, and as hospital in-patients.
In general, this is paid for by the states through their “free care” programs.
And individuals who are billed for services understand that providers generally do not attempt to collect from low-income patients.
Moreover, those who are no longer in the Medicaid program do not lose care from the many doctors who now refuse to serve Medicaid patients because of the low fees allowed in the program.
The most important fact to bear in mind is that enrollees in Medicaid show no significant improvement in clinical physical health outcomes.
This was the main finding of a large “natural experiment” supported by the federal government.
The experiment occurred when the state of Oregon opened enrollment to Medicaid in 2008, after the opportunity had been closed for many years.
Because the state did not have enough funds to accept all 90,000 individuals who wanted to enroll, it conducted a lottery to select about 30,000 individuals who were given the opportunity to apply for Medicaid.
A federally financed research team of physicians and health-care economists examined hospital records and other clinical information and also spoke with the enrollees and with those not admitted.
The researchers concluded that self-reported overall health and depression improved among those who enrolled in Medicaid, and that there was an increase in the diagnosis and treatment of diabetes for this group.
But there was no significant improvement in clinical physical outcomes for conditions including hypertension, high cholesterol, or diabetes.
Although the evidence indicates that the proposed cutbacks in federal dollars for Medicaid would not harm the physical health of those who lost their coverage, the reduction would force states to increase spending on their free-care programs.
The cuts would also increase the costs to hospitals that provide care that is not reimbursed.
It is not surprising that the prospect of adding these costs for tens of millions of patients to states’ budgets and to hospital costs causes state governors and hospital administrators to protest when Congress proposes cutting back on the Medicaid program.
But it is important for the public and members of Congress to understand the real reason for their opposition.
LONDON – If you were a Briton who had been stuck in Antarctica for the past year and a half, you might be forgiven for wishing you had stayed put.
The decisions taken during your absence by British politicians, especially the leaders of the Conservative Party, have called into question your country’s future.
First, recall that in the May 2015 general election, the Conservatives won an outright parliamentary majority, having previously been in a (surprisingly successful) coalition with the Liberal Democrats since 2010.
The Tories clearly didn’t expect their comprehensive victory, and some argue that it was the party’s promise to hold a referendum on European Union membership that made it possible.
But the salient fact is that by early spring 2016, with the Brexit referendum just three months away, Whitehall and the government had, in essence, lost all sway over policy.
I know because I was part of that government, serving as a Treasury minister.
After the “Leave” camp won the referendum, the Conservative Party, split over withdrawal from the EU, responded with a change in leadership from David Cameron to Theresa May and a significant shift in focus for May’s new government.
But the Tories still had little sway over policy, because May and her overweening advisers spent most of her time telling the cabinet how things were going to go.
The snap general election she called in April, when the Tories were 20 points ahead in opinion polls, has now left the United Kingdom with a minority government.
Consider young voters, who in the recent election appear to have gone to the polls in droves, giving huge support to Labour’s far-left leader, Jeremy Corbyn.
If young people had participated in the Brexit referendum in similar numbers, the UK would have voted “Remain.”
Today’s uncertainty, magnified by signs that the UK economy’s positive momentum is waning, would remain the stuff of nightmares.
For starters, assume that the Conservative Party remains petrified about choosing a new leader or holding another general election.
To avoid both, the Tories will need to get past their paranoia and make their next government – possibly involving a formal agreement with Northern Ireland’s Democratic Unionist Party – a sustainable arrangement.
On Brexit, for example, while the most vehement Leavers and Remainers will stick to their strong bias, it seems pretty clear that the electorate does not want to bear any economic and social pain.
So one clear conclusion of the recent vote is that May will have to consider some “softer” form of Brexit than she was previously willing to countenance.
Instead of worrying about whether Parliament will pass future bills related to the UK’s withdrawal from the EU, why not head off impasses by bringing in some Labour figures – and others – as part of a broadened Brexit negotiating team?
Many are now eagerly offering their views as to whether the UK should look again at the “Norway model” of relations with the EU, or some other scheme that maintains UK participation in the single market.
Whatever the option, it is now clear that Britain needs a policy that can command broad and genuine support.
A second change for the better would, I hope, be less controversial: reducing the power bestowed in the UK on non-elected Special Advisers, or SPADs, who have become dominant figures in all government departments.
During my 17-month experience as a minister, I became convinced that the SPADs’ excessive power – and haughty approach – undermines the UK’s excellent civil service, as well as elected and appointed ministers.
May’s two leading SPADs, Fiona Hill and Nick Timothy, took this danger to worrying levels.
They have now paid the price, with May sacking them at the demand of her party.
SPADs certainly have a role to play, but not the exalted one they too often abuse.
Third, the UK needs to put today’s political drama into perspective, and get on with policymaking, including in areas that have nothing to do with Brexit.
The Northern Powerhouse, designed to revitalize the UK’s economically neglected north, which has shown early signs of success (the Northwest, for example, has been outperforming the rest of the country economically for the past 12-15 months), needs more support from government.
Young people need greater access to a useful and affordable post-secondary education, as well as the chance to afford their own homes.
If their demands are not properly represented, they might turn away from voting in the future – and toward less constructive forms of protest.
The UK needs to be far more serious about skills training, embedding it in the country’s educational DNA in the way that apprenticeships are embedded in Germany’s.
More generally, the best way to serve today’s young people is to make higher productivity a national priority.
But for any of this to happen, May needs to use the fear of a leadership battle within the Conservative Party, and the party’s dread of anther general election, to get ahead of the coming challenges.
WASHINGTON, DC – There is now near-unanimity that the United States’ Dodd-Frank financial reform legislation, enacted in 2010, did not end the problems associated with some banks being “too big to fail.”
On the contrary, financial regulation has become a key issue in November’s presidential and congressional elections.
So who has the more plausible and workable plan for reducing the risks associated with very large financial firms?
The Democrats have an agreed and implementable strategy that would represent a definite improvement over the status quo.
The Republican proposal, unfortunately, is a recipe for greater disaster than the US (and the world) experienced in 2008.
On the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton’s campaign materials and the party platform point to a detailed plan to defend Dodd-Frank and to go further in terms of pressing the largest firms to become less complex and, if necessary, smaller.
If Clinton wins, she will draw strong support from Congressional Democrats – including her rival for the Democratic nomination, Bernie Sanders, and his fellow senator, Elizabeth Warren – when she pushes in this direction.
Some commentators claim that Clinton has been “pulled to the left” on financial regulation during the campaign.
But if you look carefully at her statements during this election cycle, they have been, from the very beginning, almost identical to what Warren has been seeking for the past half-dozen years.
Everyone in their right mind wants to prevent the largest banks from getting out of control, shifting risk into shadowy, unregulated activities (on or off their balance sheet), and fleecing consumers.
It is opposed, of course, by people who are paid – one way or another – to represent the largest banks.
On the Republican side, Donald Trump’s precise intentions are less clear, though he proudly calls himself the “king of debt,” which is not particularly encouraging.
Huge mountains of debt may help enrich individual property developers or financiers, but they typically add up to trouble for the macroeconomy.
It was precisely those mountains that collapsed on the US and global economy in 2008.
Many were buried in the Great Recession that followed; many more are still digging out.
Unlike Trump, House Republicans have formulated and published detailed plans that can fairly be compared to what the Democrats have presented.
And, in the event of a Trump presidency, financial policy would likely be crafted in large part by the House Financial Services Committee, whose chairman’s clearly stated priorities are to reduce consumer protection and remove any effective constraints on big banks’ activities.
At the heart of the House Republican strategy is a simple idea: all financial firms should be able to go bankrupt without damaging the rest of the economy and without the government becoming involved.
In September 2008, Lehman Brothers did go bankrupt – and no form of government support was provided.
There were catastrophic consequences for the rest of the financial sector, for the non-financial economy, and for employment.
The US is a large and powerful country and, when danger hits, investors buy up federal government debt – driving down interest rates.
America has a “fortress” balance sheet, as well as one of the most credible central banks in the history of the world.
If the policymakers of the moment think that government or central-bank support will help prevent a global economic meltdown, they will act accordingly.
That is what Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson, Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, and President George W. Bush (all Republicans) did after the full impact of the Lehman collapse became apparent.
The viability of the Republican bankruptcy proposal boils down to this: who will provide financing to a large complex financial institution – operating globally – while it is being restructured in bankruptcy?
If there is no financing, the scheme collapses – and we have another “Lehman moment,” or worse.
So we must be talking about a scenario in which some part of the federal government, with or without express legislative approval, scrambles to provide an ad hoc loan in the range of tens or hundreds of billions of dollars, via a judge.
The Democrats are lined up behind an approach to finance that will make the financial system safer, so that it never comes to this point again.
The Republicans’ plan would only help too-big-to-fail banks.
CAMBRIDGE: The IMF’s search for a new managing director will be attracting all the attention over the coming weeks and months, but the policies it follows are what matter most.
A catfight is now underway about which institution has been right over the past few years, the IMF with its tough treatments or the World Bank and its alternative cures.
Are they to blame for the disastrous social fallout of the financial crises of recent years?
That latter view was promoted across Asia, where governments, including that of Japan, called for an Asian IMF with alternative (softer) policies.
They gained extraordinary and unexpected support from Joseph Stiglitz, the World Bank’s chief economist and senior vice president, who recently advised that China should practice competitive devaluation and beggar-thy neighbor policies.
For beleaguered governments, Stiglitz’s proposed cures were rose petals, fragrances and scented candles along with soothing sounds.
Stiglitz’s pronouncements offered formidable support to those who opposed IMF rigor, indeed, and at the very least they confused the public and policymakers alike.
But this was music to a Japan trying to pursue its own agenda in Asia as well as to Dr. Mahatir, Malaysia’s ruler, who is on an anti-establishment kick.
In the firing line, orthodoxy was defended by IMF chief surgeon Stanley Fischer, the first deputy director and an economist with as formidable an academic reputation as Stiglitz.
That debate has gone on, right to a recent conference in Singapore which gave the Mahatir/Stiglitz team a resounding victory capped by a standing ovation from a crowd of top Asian top businessmen.
Once again, Japanese officials made their case for an Asian IMF, an alternative strategy without the pain of IMF austerity and the unaccustomed transparency.
Is it unreasonable to claim, as the saying goes, that the proof is in the pudding?
Asia today is in the midst of a powerful recovery; crisis countries have already, or are poised to, recover their pre-crisis levels of GDP.
Currencies that nose-dived in 1997/98 have strengthened substantially; markets that collapsed have turned up.
Korea, the last Asian economy to collapse is now doing best with double-digit growth and interest rates not much above American levels.
The V-shaped recovery that Mexico experienced three years ago came off bigger and faster than expected.
The same pattern has held true in Brazil, where the crisis ended shortly after it happened.
Asia, Mexico and Brazil adopted and applied IMF strategies; they raised interest rates to the sky to bring about stable currencies; only with stability did they bring down rates as investor confidence returned.
Asia’s economies also paid attention to their budgets at a time when huge bailouts made it imperative to demonstrate a glimmer of fiscal conservatism.
Money started to come back, pushing exchange rates nearly up to pre-crisis levels.
What at first sight seemed a meltdown, gradually came to seem just a very bad situation and soon a surprisingly rapid turnaround.
Every country followed much the same strategy (including Malaysia, Dr. Mahatir’s rhetoric notwithstanding).
Every time the resolve of its government weakened, the currency collapsed; every time Indonesia returned to the IMF way, the currency strengthened.
Of course, everyone should have recognized that Asia was experiencing the same cycle Mexico had recently completed.
Unfortunately, the IMF failed to point out its success in Mexico; unfortunately Asia’s economies were allowed to think that their experience was unique even if, on the way down and on the way up, it really was a replay of what Mexico had been through.
Buy the time it came to Brazil, at the end of 1998 and, again, early this year, everyone knew the script: new elections, a barely averted currency collapse, embarking on the IMF program, and a rapid rebound.
The IMF is terrible at anticipating crises; it is awful at surveillance; but it is right and successful once it comes to post-trauma treatment.
The World Bank’s alternative treatments and Japan’s Asian IMF are, despite lip service, not drawing too many clients.
When economies collapse in ways never expected, they reach for true religion and hard cures.
They have no illusion that in the midst of a financial crisis and a speculative exodus, vast deficit spending and easy money are not the answer.
Cheers for the IMF; cheers for its tough medicine; don’t leave home without it.
Like ancient monarchs, Latin American caudillos believe they have been granted lifetime powers.
The last days of former president Carlos Menem's political career, furiously fighting his own political extinction, has offered a pathetic example of this tradition.
If he couldn't win the May 18 th presidential run-off--and it was clear before the vote that some 70% of voters would reject him in favor of a virtual unknown--he would refuse to play.
So the old tyrant, surrounded by his bodyguards and weeping supporters, announced that he would withdraw from the race.
The scene was Argentine magical realism: Menem, the old but tireless caudillo, kissing the hands of his followers as they cheered from this despoiled garden near the Tropic of Capricorn.
The caudillo who oversaw the glory days of the 1990's exited the race to save himself, to avoid a defeat, and to weaken Nestor Kirchner, the man from Patagonia who is now Argentina's 49 th president.
Although the public's outrage at his tactics makes a comeback unlikely, Menem still dreams of retreating with his defeated troops and reshaping himself from an alternative power base.
Still, Menem's presence is not the greatest threat Kirchner faces.
The real danger to the president-elect is Menem's legacy: a judiciary that is subordinate to political might, a system of political parties that cannot stay afloat financially without engaging in corruption, and economic chaos.
The effects can be seen in a 17% unemployment rate, extraordinarily low salaries, and a high crime rate.
The Argentina that once boasted the highest social mobility in all of Latin America no longer exists.
Nevertheless, beneath the turmoil and scandal of the last few days, one can glimpse positive signs.
Menem's predecessor as president, Raúl Alfonsin, won a pathetic 2.3% of the vote in the first round of the election.
Menem's maneuvering notwithstanding, the polls show that the man twice elected president was at the end of his road.
His tactics of the last week produced an array of indignant and amused critiques.
Although only time will tell, it's possible that Argentina's suffering has readied the country for a new, efficient kind of leadership.
The man who will be president has not yet displayed any of the attributes of a caudillo.
Kirchner, descended from European immigrants, has not captivated the masses, but he did capture the votes of an electorate with hopes and dreams for a government that can bring more jobs, assure better wages, and increase security against crime.
If he can deliver, Argentines may be ready to bid farewell to the caudillo form of government that has dominated the country's history.
The IMF and other creditors are demanding economic adjustments to increase the fiscal surplus, including higher tariffs on privatized public services and a wage freeze for public employees.
At the same time, Argentines and their leaders need to consolidate the budding economy, deal with social inequality, and reconstitute the political system and the integrity of the judiciary.
During his university days in the 1970's, his politics were shaped by the leftist militancy of Peronism.
But both the passage of time and his political maturation as the governor of Patagonia have converted him into a European-style Social Democrat.
True, Kirchner entered the campaign not so much to win as to prepare for the next presidential election, but as Menem's opponents fell, he captured the spotlight.
To succeed, Kirchner will need the energy and imagination of a great statesman.
From the moment of victory, he will have scant time to put together a pact with the principal political forces that can sustain him.
He will also immediately have to convince a skeptical populace, already hurting, that more sacrifices are needed.
If he fails to get results quickly, his government may not last beyond six months.
If, on the other hand, he experiences a quick series of successes--even small ones--he will have helped usher in a new era.
At the turn of the 20 th century, the Radical Party offered the middle class an electoral voice.
In the middle of that century, when the country was industrializing, the Peronist Party functioned in much the same say for the working class.
These two historic moments were, however, dominated by two bosses: Hipólito Irigoyen and Juan Perón.
Now that the Radical Party is agonizing over its role and Peronism is divided into three factions, perhaps Argentines will be able to construct a political option that relies on real leaders, and relinquishes caudillos.
But if Kirchner's presidency gives rise to yet more political frustration, then we Argentines will again make the mistake of looking for a caudillo who promises to answer all our prayers.
It's possible that a new caudillo in different robes could lead the masses through yet another round of "magical nationalism," hating everything foreign and underscoring the dark side of globalization.
You want to donate money to a charity that is working to reduce the toll.
The first thing that many people ask about charities is, “How much of my donation is spent on administration?”
In the United States, that figure is readily available from Charity Navigator, a Web site that has five million users.
But the information is taken from forms that the charities themselves complete and send to the tax authorities.
No one checks the forms, and the proportions allocated to administration and program expenses are easily massaged with a little creative accounting.
Worse still, that figure, even if accurate, tells you nothing about the charity’s impact.
If, for example, an agency working to reduce poverty in Africa cuts staff with expert knowledge, it is more likely to end up funding projects that fail.
It may not even know which of its projects fail, because evaluating them, and learning from mistakes, requires staff – and that adds to administrative costs.
In 2006, Holden Karnofsky and Elie Hassenfeld faced the question of which charity would make the best use of their money.
They were in their mid-twenties, earning six-figure incomes at an investment company – more than they needed – and were thinking about donating money to help make the world a better place.
As investment advisers, they would never recommend investing in a company without detailed information about how well it was achieving its goals.
They wanted to make similarly well-informed choices about the charities to which they contributed.
So Karnofsky and Hassenfeld got together with six friends who also worked in finance and divided up the field to find out which charities could be shown to be effective.
They contacted organizations and received lots of attractive marketing material, but nothing that answered basic questions: what do the charities do with their money, and what evidence do they have that their activities help?
They called many charities, but eventually realized something that seemed extraordinary: the information was just not there.
This, Karnofsky and Hassenfeld thought, is not a good way to go about charitable work.
The fact that charities were unprepared for such questions indicated to Karnofsky and Hassenfeld that other donors and foundations give more or less blindly, without the information needed to make sound decisions about whom to support.
Karnofsky and Hassenfeld now had a new goal: to obtain and publicize the information.
To that end, they founded an organization called GiveWell so that other donors would not have as hard a time extracting it as they had had.
However, it soon became apparent that the task required more than part-time attention, and the following year, after raising $300,000 from their colleagues, Karnofsky and Hassenfeld left their jobs and began working full-time for GiveWell and its associated grant-making body, The Clear Fund.
They invited charities to apply for grants of $25,000 in five broad humanitarian categories, with the application process demanding the kind of information that they had been seeking.
In this way, a substantial part of the money they had raised would go to the most effective charity in each category, while simultaneously encouraging transparency and rigorous evaluation.
The first report on which organizations are most effective at saving or transforming lives in Africa is now available on GiveWell’s Web site, www.givewell.net .
Population Services International, which promotes and sells items like condoms, to prevent HIV infection, and bed nets, to prevent malaria, came out on top, followed by Partners in Health, an organization that provides health care to poor rural populations.
The third-ranked organization was Interplast, which is more narrowly focused on correcting deformities like cleft palate.
Investors are interested in financial returns, so there is no problem about measuring distinct values – in the end it all comes down to money.
It is more difficult to compare the reduction of suffering brought about by correcting a facial deformity with saving a life.
In other ways, too, evaluating charities takes time, and can be expensive.
Perhaps for this reason, many organizations, including some of the best-known anti-poverty organizations working in Africa, did not respond to GiveWell’s request for information.
No doubt they calculated that a chance to get a $25,000 grant wasn’t worth it.
But if donors start to follow GiveWell’s recommendations, then a high ranking from GiveWell could be worth far more than the value of the grant.
In the US, individual donors give about $200 billion to charities each year.
No one knows how effective that vast sum is in achieving the goals that donors intend to support.
By giving charities an incentive to become more transparent and more focused on being demonstrably effective, GiveWell could make our charitable donations do much more good than ever before.
That figure contrasts markedly with elections in the United States, where the turnout in the 2004 presidential election barely exceeded 60%.
In Congressional elections that fall in the middle of a president’s term, usually fewer than 40% of eligible Americans bother to vote.
In the 1920’s, when voter turnout fell below 60%, parliament made voting compulsory.
Since then, despite governments of varying political complexions, there has been no serious attempt to repeal the law, which polls show is supported by about 70% of the population.
Those without an acceptable excuse, like illness or travel abroad, must pay a small fine, but the number fined is less than 1% of eligible voters.
In practice, what is compulsory is not casting a valid vote, but going to the polling place, having one’s name checked off, and putting a ballot paper in the box.
The secrecy of the ballot makes it impossible to prevent people writing nonsense on their ballot papers or leaving them blank.
While the percentage of invalid votes is a little higher where voting is compulsory, it comes nowhere near offsetting the difference in voter turnout.
Belgium and Argentina introduced it earlier, and it is practiced in many other countries, especially in Latin America, although both sanctions and enforcement vary.
Because I was in the US at the time of the Australian election, I was under no compulsion to vote.
I had many reasons to hope for the defeat of John Howard’s conservative government, but that doesn’t explain why I went to some trouble to vote, since the likelihood that my vote would make any difference was miniscule (and, predictably, it did not).
When voting is voluntary, and the chance that the result will be determined by any single person’s vote is extremely low, even the smallest cost – for example, the time it takes to stroll down to the polling place, wait in line, and cast a ballot – is sufficient to make voting seem irrational.
Yet if many people follow this line of reasoning, and do not vote, a minority of the population can determine a country’s future, leaving a discontented majority.
In the 2005 national elections, barely 40% of those eligible voted, the lowest total since the advent of free elections after the communist period.
As a result, Jaroslaw Kaczynski was able to become prime minister with the support of a coalition of parties that gained a majority of seats in parliament, despite receiving only six million votes, out of a total of 30 million eligible voters.
When Kaczynski was forced to go to the polls again only two years later, it became evident that many of those who had not voted in 2005 were unhappy with the outcome.
Turnout rose to nearly 54%, with the increase especially marked among younger and better-educated voters.
If we don’t want a small minority to determine our government, we will favor a high turnout.
Yet since our own vote makes such a tiny contribution to the outcome, each of us still faces the temptation to get a free ride, not bothering to vote while hoping that enough other people will vote to keep democracy robust and to elect a government that is responsive to the views of a majority of citizens.
Some people vote because they enjoy it, and would have nothing better to do with the time saved if they did not.
Others are motivated by a sense of civic duty that does not assess the rationality of voting in terms of the possible impact of one’s own ballot.
Still others might vote not because they imagine that they will determine the outcome of the election, but because, like football fans, they want to cheer their team on.
They may vote because if they don’t, they will be in no position to complain if they don’t like the government that is elected.
Or they may calculate that while the chances of their determining the outcome are only one in several million, the result is of such importance that even that tiny chance is enough to outweigh the minor inconveniences of voting.
If these considerations fail to get people to the polls, however, compulsory voting is one way of overcoming the free-rider problem.
The small cost imposed on not voting makes it rational for everyone to vote and at the same time establishes a social norm of voting.
Countries worried about low voter turnout would do well to consider their compulsory model.
NEW YORK – The problems with China’s economic-growth pattern have become well known in recent years, with the Chinese stock-market’s recent free-fall bringing them into sharper focus.
But discussions of the Chinese economy’s imbalances and vulnerabilities tend to neglect some of the more positive elements of its structural evolution, particularly the government’s track record of prompt corrective intervention, and the substantial state balance sheet that can be deployed, if necessary.
In this regard, however, the stock-market bubble that developed in the first half of the year should be viewed as an exception.
Not only did Chinese regulators enable the bubble’s growth by allowing retail investors – many of them newcomers to the market – to engage in margin trading (using borrowed money); the policy response to the market correction that began in late June has also been highly problematic.
I was in Beijing in the fall of 2007, when the Shanghai Composite Index skyrocketed to almost 6,000 (the recent peak was just over 5,000), owing partly to the participation of relatively inexperienced retail investors.
At the time, I thought that the greatest policy concern would be the burgeoning current-account surplus of over 10% of GDP, which would create friction with China’s trading partners.
But the country’s leaders were far more concerned about the social consequences of the stock-market correction that soon followed.
Although social unrest did not emerge, a prolonged period of moribund equity prices did, even as the economy continued to grow rapidly.
In 2008, it was a combination of exploding asset prices and excessive household-sector leverage that fueled the global financial crisis.
When such a debt-fueled bubble bursts, its effects are transmitted directly to the real economy via household-sector balance sheets, with the reduction in consumption contributing to a decline in employment and private investment.
It is much harder to find circuit breakers for this dynamic than for, say, that caused by balance-sheet distress in the financial sector.
Not only did they fail to mitigate the risks, underscored in the 2007 collapse, that new retail investors introduce into the market; they actually exacerbated them, by allowing, and even encouraging, those investors to accumulate leverage through margin buying.
Making matters worse, when the current stock-market correction began in early June, Chinese regulators relaxed margin-buying restrictions, while encouraging state-owned enterprises and asset managers to purchase more stocks.
The authorities, it seems, were more interested in propping up the market than allowing for a controlled price correction.
To be sure, China’s stock-market bubble did not emerge until recently.
Last October, when the Shanghai Composite Index was in the 2,500 range, many analysts considered equity prices undervalued.
Given relatively strong economic growth, rising prices seemed justified until about March, when the market, driven by mostly thinly traded small- and mid-cap stocks, shot to over 5,000, placing the economy at risk.
(And, in fact, many still claimed that the rally was not unsustainable, as the stock market was trading at a forward price-to-earnings ratio of about 15, consistent with its ten-year average, in mid-April.)
While periodic bubbles may be unavoidable, and no bubble is without consequences, a highly leveraged bubble tends to cause far more damage, owing to its impact on the real economy and the duration of the deleveraging process.
This is reflected in the persistently sluggish recovery in the advanced economies today.
Even the United States, which has fared better than most since the crisis, has recorded GDP growth of little more than 10% since the start of 2008; over the same period, China’s economy grew by about 66%.
Of course, with China’s household sector holding a relatively small share of equities compared to real estate, the current stock-market slump is unlikely to derail the economy.
Nonetheless, as in 2007, the prospect that lost savings will trigger social unrest cannot be dismissed, especially at a time when tools like social media enable citizens easily to share information, air grievances, and mobilize protest.
As previous crises have shown, and as the current downturn in China has highlighted, steps must be taken to mitigate market risks.
Specifically, China needs prudential regulation that limits the use of leverage for asset purchases.
Here, the country already has an advantage: relatively high levels of equity and low mortgage-to-value ratios typically characterize real-estate purchases by China’s household sector.
Moreover, once a market correction begins, the authorities should allow it to run its course, rather than prop up prices with additional leverage – an approach that only prolongs the correction.
If Chinese regulators allow the market to correct, sophisticated institutional investors with a long-term value orientation will ultimately step in, enhancing the market’s stability.
In the interim, the use of public balance sheets to purchase enough equity to prevent the market from over-correcting may be justified.
As China’s markets expand – the capitalization of the Shanghai and Shenzhen markets is on the order of $11 trillion – they are increasingly outstripping policymakers’ capacity to manage prices and valuations.
The only practical way forward is for the Chinese authorities to focus on regulatory and institutional development, while following through on their commitment to allow markets to play the decisive role in allocating resources.
OXFORD – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe's visit to the Yasukuni Shrine has enraged the Chinese and South Korean governments and ignited – no surprise – a firestorm of protest across Asia.
The shrine, which honors more than a thousand indicted war criminals who took part in Japan’s disastrous war in Asia, remains a place of fascination for Japanese rightists, who persist in claiming that Japan’s war in Asia was a war of liberation against Western imperialism.
This claim sounds particularly hollow in China and Korea, which suffered horrifically from Imperial Japan’s invasion and occupation of much of Asia.
Yet there has always been a jarring element in official Chinese protests against the Yasukuni Shrine visits.
But, just as Japanese conservatives are rightly taken to task for refusing to acknowledge the horrors of their country’s colonialist past, so China would do well to expand discussion of its own wartime history at home.
For many decades, under Mao Zedong, the only acceptable version of China’s wartime experience was that the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) spearheaded the resistance against the Japanese, honing its armies while preparing one of the world’s most significant social revolutions.
Meanwhile, China’s Nationalist (Kuomintang) government under Chiang Kai-shek, weakened by incompetence and corruption, did little to oppose the Japanese.
Yet, in recent years, research from China itself has shown the enormous scale and cost of the war against Japan.
Fourteen million or more Chinese were killed from 1937 to 1945, and 80-100 million became refugees.
As the bombs fell on China’s wartime Nationalist capital, Chongqing, the social contract between state and society became more important.
The state demanded more from its people, including conscription and ever-higher taxes; but the people also began to demand more from their government, including adequate food provision, hygiene, and medical care.
To understand why the war changed China so profoundly, historians had to move away from treating the 1937-1945 period as a simple story of an inevitable Communist victory.
Thus, in the last two decades, China has started remembering its own war history anew.
It helped that the Chinese government has been keen to encourage reunification with Taiwan, meaning that a more favorable view of the Nationalist government has appeared on the mainland.
Indeed, in recent years, the Nationalists’ reputation in the People’s Republic has been rehabilitated in ways unimaginable just a quarter-century ago.
The Nationalists did most of the set-piece fighting between 1937 and 1945, and the stands their armies made at cities such as Changsha and Wuhan are now commemorated with museums and statues.
In Chongqing, monuments such as Chiang Kai-shek’s old villa at Huangshan have been restored, and the former leader himself is praised for his contributions to resisting the Japanese.
One of China’s top television hosts, Cui Yongyuan, began a documentary project on Communist wartime veterans, only to become distracted by his frequent encounters with Nationalist veterans who had fought the Japanese, but whose contributions had been airbrushed out of history after Mao’s victory in 1949.
And historians have come to acknowledge that the Nationalist government’s flaws – corruption, inflation, military weakness – were, in part, a product of its long war against Japan, which it waged essentially alone between 1937 and the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in December 1941.
Archives that were previously restricted or closed have allowed both Chinese and foreign researchers to gather materials to tell previously forbidden stories.
As a result, I was able to give, for the first time in English, a comprehensive account of China’s wartime experience that combined the stories of the Nationalists and Communists who resisted the Japanese, as well as those of Japan’s local collaborators.
But many gaps remain in how China tells its war history to its own people.
School textbooks remain simplistic, with the Communist role still the most prominent and the Nationalist role more of a caricature.
Video games in which Chinese troops mow down Japanese soldiers are very popular, accounting for a significant share of the massive online multiplayer gaming sub-culture in China.
In general, the war against Japan is used to fuel a sense that history thwarted China’s rightful rise.
Of course, the Japanese right’s attempts to distort the history of the invasion should be condemned, as they are by many in Japan itself.
But China’s leaders and public culture should not use the revised understanding of the war as a tool to build a new nationalism.
The proper use of history in public culture is to nurture a thoughtful and skeptical attitude toward the complexities of the past.
By achieving this, China could really embarrass any Japanese leader who thinks about visiting the Yasukuni Shrine.
MOSCOW – I have just returned to Star City (Russia’s spaceflight training center) from a long weekend in Moscow, and it struck me how much – and how little – has changed since I first came here 20 years ago, in the spring of 1989.
As I passed an ad in the Moscow metro promoting advertising space for sale, I remembered hurtling down one of those same long, fast escalators sometime in the mid-1990’s with a pioneering advertising man.
Today, they are, indeed, crammed with ads, fulfilling his wildest dreams.
A few years ago, I would be thrilled to see a Web site listed within any of those ads.
In fact, a couple of years ago, the Russian search-engine company Yandex (I’m on its board), took out an ad gently poking fun at Russia’s old regime of opacity.
At the bottom of every escalator in the Moscow metro is a glass booth for the escalator monitor – usually a grumpy-looking woman whose sole job is to turn off the escalator in case of an emergency.
There’s a sign on the booth that says, “The escalator monitor does not answer questions,” in a Soviet-style formulation that’s close to saying, “The monitor does not give consultations.”
Yandex bought ads in about half the subway cars, saying, “The operator does not give consultations… so please address your questions to Yandex.”
Yandex’s ads are gone, but those signs are, unfortunately, still there – not just in the metro, but in many other places where public servants do not want to talk to the public – police stations, ticket offices, and public buildings of many kinds.
Information has been so scarce in Russia that Web sites such as tutu.ru (train and plane schedules) and banki.ru (bank information for consumers) seem like miracles.
But, while governments may be unresponsive, everywhere commercially-driven enterprises are responding to user feedback.
Both legislation and the forces of competition and consumer demand are driving companies to disclose more about their products and to respond to consumer queries.
Ten years ago, you were lucky to find the phone number and address of the manufacturer on a tube of toothpaste.
Now, you can usually find a Web site that will let you find out more and ask questions.
Even more interesting are sites and services such as Twitter and Viewpoints (I’m an adviser) and many other blogs and rating services that offer independent views.
And then there’s Barcode Wikipedia ( http://www.sicamp.org/?page_id=21 ), a brilliant project still waiting to get off the ground.
The idea is that you can scan in the barcode of any product, and get third-party information – where it was made, what was used to make it (ingredients, components, and labor), how much CO2 it created, etc.
Of course, there will be arguments about the data, just as there are arguments about Wikipedia’s accuracy.
But having a central place to argue about facts, one easily linked from any product, would be a huge step forward for practical transparency.
If we know how sausages are made, shouldn’t we also be able to find out how laws are made and enforced, and what the government officials whose salaries we pay do with their time?
I’m a member of the board of the Sunlight Foundation, a nonprofit devoted to government transparency in the United States.
Our first initiative was to get the members of the US Congress to post their own schedules online.
If some legislator wants to post that an hour is private, that’s fine.
But if that hour was really a lunch with a lobbyist, then they (and their aides) would have to lie deliberately to conceal it.
Of course, there is no way to enforce full disclosure, but by creating explicit processes and expectations, we hope to reset norms.
If an official meets with a lobbyist and is not ashamed of it, he can simply say so.
And if an official meets mostly with lobbyists, at the expense of other types of meetings, voters can make judgments about that, too.
It is funding and collaborating with a variety of start-ups devoted to collecting, manipulating, and visualizing data from all kinds of public records and other sources.
Their tools can be used by anyone, in any country – as long as they can get the data.
We want people to expect to see such information, just as they now expect information about a food product or an item of clothing.
If normal people had asked more questions, and had expected to understand the answers they were getting, we might not have gotten ourselves into the financial crisis currently gripping the world.
If people had really understood what was going on, they might have had the sense to stop borrowing money they couldn’t pay back and buying things they couldn’t afford.
But this crisis may have one good outcome: people will be less likely to listen to authorities, and more interested in finding out for themselves what is going on.
This week, America and Singapore ironed out the final stumbling blocks to a bilateral free trade agreement (FTA).
Until recently, most East Asian countries pursued non-discriminatory trade policies through unilateral liberalisation, the Asian/Pacific Economic Community, and the World Trade Organisation (WTO).
As the US/Singapore deal shows, discriminatory bilateral and regional initiatives are growing more popular.
An East Asian economic bloc forming around either China and/or Japan now seems plausible.
East Asian countries have relatively liberal trade policies and are reasonably well integrated into the global economy.
Myanmar, Vietnam, Cambodia, and Laos, all very poor, have higher levels of protection.
On trade policy it is defensive, especially in its addiction to agricultural protectionism.
China narrowed the trade policy gap with other developing countries, bringing average tariffs down to Southeast Asian and Latin American levels (about 10%) and establishing comparable openness to foreign direct investment (FDI).
The upshot is that the emerging market policy environment is a lot more competitive, especially in terms of attracting FDI.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) is talking to several third countries.
To date only a proposed ASEAN-China FTA has got off the starting blocks.
But with the WTO stuck in drift and deadlock over the past few years, there is a race to secure preferential access to the markets of the major powers, and to defuse trade tension by locking into strong bilateral and regional partnerships.
Given today's trends, a loose East Asian trade bloc revolving around China (more likely than Japan) could emerge alongside US-led and EU-led blocs, all interlinked by a cross-regional patchwork of bilateral and "plurilateral" FTAs.
This scenario is worrying if the WTO does not get out of its rut, because a world economy that has been sliced up regionally will be dominated by discrimination, knots of red tape, and power plays.
However, if the global trade framework institutionalised in the WTO advances, especially through multilateral, non-discriminatory liberalisation in the present Doha Round, the new regionalism will probably turn out to be benign.
Ultimately, as a region highly dependent on trade with and inward investment from the rest of the world, FTAs are not enough for East Asia.
The region will continue to have a long-term stake in a WTO that delivers freer trade worldwide, that is, multilaterally rather than bilaterally or regionally.
The WTO is important to East Asia, but the reverse is also true.
Of the twenty or so active developing and newly developed countries in the WTO, almost half come from the region.
The Doha Round will not make sustained progress without the active participation of East Asia, on individual issues and across the board.
Because of its economic and trade muscle, China is bound to play a more prominent role as the Doha round unfolds.
There are early, positive signs that it is adopting a "Brazilian," as opposed to an "Indian," strategy within the WTO.
It is not being negative or obstructionist in blocking the liberalization process on several fronts, which is India's historic manner of conducting global trade negotiations.
This is the right approach for those in China's leadership who wish to extract maximum benefits from the WTO to bolster domestic reform.
Taiwan is also set to play a constructive role--if mainland China lets it.
The city states, Hong Kong and Singapore, have clear-sighted WTO policies, focusing on market access and strong rules.
Malaysia and Thailand are also fairly active in the WTO, with a mix of free-market and protectionist positions.
Indonesia and the Philippines are weaker, overwhelmed by policy incoherence and fire-fighting at home, and with insufficient capacity to deal with the WTO's burgeoning and increasingly complicated agenda.
Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia are in the queue for WTO accession.
Strong US leadership is required to push the WTO in this direction while avoiding an EU-style future (regulatory overload) or a UN-style future (an irrelevant talking shop).
This is more likely under a Bush administration with better open-market credentials and a more assertive foreign policy than any Democratic alternative.
However, Robert Zoellick, President Bush's Trade Representative, needs allies.
MUNICH – Most people used to think of the Internet as a force for good.
It was supposed to allow us not only to shop, stay in touch with former classmates, and find a new sushi restaurant; it was also supposed to empower us politically by allowing the disenfranchised to make their voices heard, help activists mobilize supporters, and enable ordinary citizens to publicize evidence of official corruption or police brutality.
But doubts have crept in – and not only since the revelations of government agencies’ use of the Internet to spy on us, our leaders, and one another.
Unless and until it becomes a space where rules and rights apply like they do in the real world, that is unlikely to change.
At the end of the 1990’s, 4% of the world’s population was using the Internet; today, almost 40% do.
But the share of countries classified as “not free” or “partly free” by the democracy watchdog Freedom House has hardly changed over the same period.
In the battle between networks and hierarchies, the hierarchies seem to be winning more often than not.
One reason is that governments have become as skillful at using the Internet and modern communications technology as activists.
Autocratic governments use it to track down protest and opposition leaders, as we have recently seen in Ukraine.
Some people even argue that the Internet acts as a political release valve that helps dictators stay in power.
Internet-inspired movements usually have lasting impact only if they generate traditional political activity, such as street protests or the establishment of political parties.
For this, they need leadership, which net activists tend to reject, because they view themselves as pure grassroots movements.
In the absence of viable strategies and clear direction, most Internet-aided uprisings have dissipated quickly.
The Internet has thus turned out to be less potent than expected in the fight against tyranny.
While democracies have arguably become more vibrant, their politics have become more volatile.
Only 16% of Americans in their 40’s read (print) newspapers these days; the share among 20-somethings is 6%.
But they encourage people to retrieve only information and commentaries that fit their existing views.
While traditional media can present their readers with balanced coverage, digital media can fuel political polarization.
Moreover, political firebrands, populists, and radicals, from Italy’s Beppe Grillo to American Tea Party members, use social media and the blogosphere to appeal directly to potential supporters.
The Internet allows many political upstarts to amass a large following quickly, only to disappear just as fast.
But the ebb and flow can unsettle established politics – for example, when centrist parties move to the right to lure voters away from more extreme parties.
At the same time, young people seem to think that they have exhausted their civic duties by tweeting and blogging.
In the United Kingdom, a retiree over 60 is more likely to be a trade-union member than a worker under 30 is.
Without civil-society organizations, politics becomes more fragmented and less cohesive – and finding workable compromises becomes harder.
The revelations of snooping by the US National Security Agency (NSA) will hasten a more realistic assessment of the Internet’s effect on politics, providing a welcome opportunity to consider what has gone wrong and what could be put right.
A multitude of small steps could help – such as giving pro-democracy movements the technology needed to evade autocrats, presenting digital media in a balanced way, and making political parties more responsive to their members.
But the fundamental challenge is to suffuse the Internet with the same rules, rights, and values that pervade our democracies.
Human rights, and not only the right to personal privacy, must be respected in cyberspace.
Because no single body or government sets rules for the entire Internet, any digital code of conduct would have to emerge from the grassroots – and thus would be highly imperfect.
But perhaps the NSA has helped start the discussion: though we may not know which rules we want, we may now have gained a much better idea of which rules we do not want.
NEW YORK – My very first serious job was as a fact-checker for Forbes magazine (now mostly a laissez-faire collection of blogs).
And, despite having left the church, I still feel a profound reverence for the holy truth.
So, in most of the discussion about business models occasioned by the sale of the Washington Post to Amazon.com founder and CEO Jeff Bezos, the values that I have held dear are being tarnished.
Even reputable fact-checkers disagree on the origin of the famous admonition to journalists: “Comfort the afflicted, and afflict the comfortable!”
(They even disagree on whether it was first directed at preachers or at newsmen).
In any case, journalism is one business in which the customer is not always right.
The challenge that business considerations pose to journalism – both news and commentary providers – takes the form of three separate temptations: to slant the news to please readers rather than inform them, and thus attract advertisers; to slant the news to please advertisers directly; and to slant the news to advance owners’ political or commercial interests.
These temptations have always been present, but “hard” news could be supported by constituency-pleasing sections, advertiser-pleasing features and product reviews, news-you-can-use sections replete with ads for related goods, and, of course, the classified ads.
Brands and advertisers can speak directly to customers, and markets no longer need the convening power of a newspaper to match buyers and sellers (the purpose of classified ads).
Investigative journalism and serious commentary, like religion, do not have a profit model.
They serve a higher purpose (although they can be and often are corrupted or twisted for bad ends).
Many commentators expect him to digitize-monetize-revolutionize the Post (whatever that means).
He runs Amazon tightly and for the long term; it generates huge amounts of cash, which it reinvests on behalf of all of its shareholders.
This is a man who is a generous donor to the Long Now Foundation (I am on its board) and who personally founded and owns a rocket company, Blue Origin (I am on the board of a competing company called XCOR).
I think – I hope! – that Bezos will make the proper distinctions.
He understands the difference between media (yet another of his personal investments is the Web site Business Insider) and journalism.
In our market-driven times, we tend to think about the price of everything and the value of nothing, as Oscar Wilde put it.
But we are also discovering behavioral economics – the human quirks and emotional urges that drive people to do things that make little economic sense.
The best joke of all – that Bezos bought the Post by mistake through an errant one-click purchase (a capability patented by Amazon) – has a ring of truth to it.
But I do think there is sustainable value of the kind that no corporation or financially driven investor could ever justify.
Bezos’s move is not like the recent purchases of Newsweek, where there was an illusion of turning it around, or the Boston Globe, bought by John Henry, who owns the Boston Red Sox baseball team and Liverpool Football Club.
Perhaps the most interesting example is Rupert Murdoch – the son of an Australian news baron – who recently split his family-controlled News Corporation, into the TV and film company 21st Century Fox and the less profitable new News Corp, which retains the news and publishing operations.
Although Murdoch remains chairman of both, everyone expects him to focus more on the news business.
That portfolio includes both customer-pleasing tabloids with a troubled history of pandering, spying, and bribing, and the venerable journalism of the Wall Street Journal’s news pages – a contradiction that splitting the parent has not resolved.
And, finally, there is Project Syndicate itself (which publishes this column).
Originally funded by yet another billionaire, George Soros, Project Syndicate operates independently to provide hard-to-monetize informed opinion and analysis with nary an “advertorial” or product review in sight.
One way to think about the best business model for journalism is to think about the best business model for food.
A tony à la carte sanctuary with great wines that generate most of the profit?
A franchise with pre-cooked dishes thawed and heated in huge ovens?
But there is also the philanthropic soup kitchen – in the Post’s case, a high-end one, delivering nutritious food in a world in which restaurants now give away less-healthy food, because they use it to sell other goods.
In the end, I think Bezos wants less to own the Post than to set it free, for at least a generation or two.
As Bezos wrote in a memo to the staff: “The values of the Post do not need changing.
The paper’s duty will remain to its readers and not to the private interests of its owners.
If I am wrong, I hope this commentary will help to afflict him into righteousness!
NEW YORK – “It was the best of times; it was the worst of times,” said President Xi Jinping, quoting Charles Dickens’ famous line to open his speech at the 2017 World Economic Forum.
“Today,” Xi continued, “we also live in a world of contradictions.”
On one hand, “growing material wealth and advances in science and technology” have enabled unprecedented rates of development.
On the other hand, “frequent regional conflicts, global challenges like terrorism and refugees, as well as poverty, unemployment, and a widening income gap” are generating deep uncertainty.
Xi then posed a potent question: “What has gone wrong with the world?”
Perhaps the answer lies with the very technology that Xi regards as the key to China’s rise to high-income status.
Specifically, it may be that we have reached a turning point in the march of technological progress – one that we are navigating very badly.
Technology has been shaping and reshaping our lives ever since early human beings discovered how to make tools from stone.
It is only natural for such a long process to include moments when technological change generates unprecedented challenges.
In mid-eighteenth-century Britain, the revolution’s birthplace, progress entailed considerable adversity.
Some workers toiled 12-14 hours per day, yet inequality surged.
And the incidence of child labor rose beyond the levels seen in some of the poorest Sub-Saharan African economies today.
Groundbreaking research in economics was carried out by the likes of Adam Smith and Antoine Cournot, leading to novel interventions like progressive income tax, as well as new labor laws and regulations.
Human development has seen other “industrial revolutions,” including the one that is currently unfolding.
This so-called Fourth Industrial Revolution is centered on advances in digital technology, including “labor-linking technologies” (which enable workers across continents to work together in real time) and, more recently, artificial intelligence and robotics.
These advances have enabled economic globalization, which, like the Industrial Revolution, has brought unprecedented progress, as Xi acknowledged, while generating new challenges, including rising inequality and worker vulnerability.
But instead of managing those challenges, as Europe did in the nineteenth century, much of the world is succumbing to political polarization, rising nationalism, and a toxic blame game.
Most notably, the United States under President Donald Trump has initiated what is rapidly escalating into a tit-for-tat trade war – one that will be devastating for the entire world, but especially for the US itself.
What such behavior fails to take into account is that globalization is, fundamentally, a natural phenomenon.
It is the result of billions of individuals going about their daily activities, making decisions based on the possibilities available to them.
Arguing against globalization is as constructive as blaming gravity for a building’s collapse.
As Xi pointed out in his WEF speech, it “is a natural outcome of scientific and technological progress, not something created by any individuals or any countries.”
In the case of Trump’s trade war, US policy also reflects a misunderstanding – one that economists have repeatedly pointed out – about bilateral trade deficits.
According to Trump, a trade deficit is essentially a loss, and the countries with surpluses vis-à-vis the US, such as Mexico or China, are behaving in unfair and exploitative ways.
At the end of each year, you run up a large “trade deficit” vis-à-vis the store, because the store sells goods to you, whereas you do not sell anything to the store.
To claim that China “owes” the US for its trade bilateral trade surplus would be like saying that your local grocery store owes you for the money you spent there during the last year.
In fact, you were not cheated, just as your employer was not cheated by the bilateral deficit it runs with you.
In an age of advanced technologies and accelerating specialization, attempting to manufacture everything domestically or bilaterally would be prohibitively costly.
For now, the US seems committed to its demands that its partners pay up.
The more likely scenario, however, is that economies like Canada, Europe, and Mexico will seek to offset the impact of Trump’s tariffs by deepening their ties with China – an obvious win for America’s main global competitor.
Meanwhile, US corporations will probably move production elsewhere to avoid retaliatory tariffs, as some – such as Harley-Davidson – have already threatened to do.
There is no denying that the technological turning point at which we find ourselves has caused strain for all countries.
But instead of blaming one another for the challenges generated by technological progress – an approach that will only bring about the worst of times – we should work together to address them.
Any country that refuses to do so will create strain for all – and end up condemning itself to being left behind.
NEWPORT BEACH – Judging from the skittishness of both markets and “consensus expectations,” the United States’ economic prospects are confusing.
One day, the country is on the brink of a double-dip recession; the next, it is on the verge of a turbo-charged recovery, powered by resilient consumers and US multinationals starting to deploy, at long last, their massive cash reserves.
In the process, markets take investors on a wild rollercoaster ride, with the European crisis (riddled with even more confusion and volatility) serving to aggravate their queasiness.
This situation is both understandable and increasingly unsettling for America’s well-being and that of the global economy.
It reflects the impact of fundamental (and historic) economic and financial re-alignments, insufficient policy responses, and system-wide rigidities that frustrate structural change.
As a result, there are now legitimate questions about the underlying functioning of the US economy and, therefore, its evolution in the months and years ahead.
One way to understand current conditions – and what is needed to improve them – is to consider two events that recently attracted considerable worldwide attention: the launch of Boeing’s Dreamliner passenger jet and the tragic death of Apple’s Steve Jobs.
Let us start with some simple aeronautic dynamics, using an analogy that my PIMCO colleague, Bill Gross, came up with to describe the economic risks facing the American economy.
For the Dreamliner to take off, ascend, and maintain a steady altitude, it must do more than move forward.
It has to move forward fast enough to exceed critical physical thresholds, which are significantly higher than those for most of Boeing’s other (smaller) planes.
Failure would mean succumbing to a mid-air stall, with tepid forward motion giving way to a sudden loss of altitude.
Unless we are convinced of the Dreamliner’s ability to avoid stall speed, it makes no sense to talk about all the ways in which it will enhance the travel experience for millions of people around the world.
Specifically, the question is not whether it can grow, but whether it can grow fast enough to propel a large economy that, according to the US Federal Reserve, faces “balance-sheet deleveraging, credit constraints, and household and business uncertainty about the economic outlook.”
And, remember, it is just over a year since certain US officials were proclaiming the economy’s “summer of recovery” – a view underpinned by the erroneous belief that America was reaching “escape velocity.”
Stall speed is a terrifying risk for an economy like that of the US, which desperately needs to grow robustly.
Without rapid growth, there is no way to reverse persistently high and increasingly structural (and therefore protracted) unemployment; safely de-leverage over-indebted balance sheets; and prevent already-disturbing income and wealth inequalities from growing worse.
Specifically, policymakers must be open and willing to understand the unusual challenges facing the US economy, react accordingly, and possess sufficiently potent policy instruments.
Unfortunately, this has been far from the case in America (and in Europe, where the situation is worse).
Moreover, US policymakers in the last few weeks have been more interested in pointing fingers at Europe and China than in recognizing and responding to the paradigm shifts that are at the root of the country’s economic problems and mounting social challenges.
This is where the insights of Steve Jobs, one of the world’s best innovators and entrepreneurs, come in.
He was a master at converting the complicated into the simple; and, rather than being paralyzed by complexity, he found new ways to deconstruct and overcome it.
And he eschewed the search for the single “big bang” in favor of aiming for multiple breakthroughs.
Underlying it all was a willingness to evolve – a drive for perfection through experimentation.
Moreover, he excelled at selling to audiences worldwide both his vision and his strategy for realizing it.
So far, America’s economic policymakers have fallen short on all of these fronts.
Rather than committing to a comprehensive set of urgently-needed reinforcing measures, they seem obsessed with the futile search for the one “killer app” that will solve all of the country's economic problems.
Little has been done to deconstruct structural complexity, let alone win sufficient public support for a medium-term vision, a credible implementation strategy, and a set of measures that is adequate to the task at hand.
The longer the policymaking impasse persists, the greater the stall-speed risk for an economy that already has an unemployment crisis, a large budget deficit, many underwater mortgages, and policy interest rates floored at zero.
This is an atmosphere in which unhealthy balance sheets come under even greater pressure, and healthy investors refuse to engage.
In the process, the risk of recession remains uncomfortably high, the unemployment crisis deepens, and inequities rise as already-stretched social safety nets prove even more porous.
BEIJING – Now that China’s National People’s Congress has voted – 2,958 to two – to abolish presidential term limits, Xi Jinping could rule China indefinitely, rather than completing a tenure of two five-year terms in 2023.
To what degree is Xi set to become the all-powerful ruler many observers predict?
China watchers have been debating the character and extent of Xi’s power since last October’s 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China (CPC).
One indicator has been the enshrinement of his ideology, “Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era,” in China’s constitution.
With Mao Zedong being the only previous Chinese leader to have his eponymous “Thought” constitutionalized, some now argue that Xi is now the most powerful leader since Mao.
Of course, Deng Xiaoping – who presided over China’s era of “reform and opening up” for two decades, beginning in 1978 – was also lionized, with “Deng Xiaoping Theory.”
And “socialism with Chinese characteristics” is Deng’s signature policy.
But Xi’s explicit mention of a “New Era” marks a departure from Deng, indicating that the era of reform is over.
In contrast to the People’s Republic of 40 years ago – a rural, agrarian country emerging from the Cultural Revolution – today’s China is an economic and political superpower with a rapidly urbanizing and technologically advanced society.
Xi’s New Era thus represents a milestone in China’s long search for “wealth and power.”
Instead of “opening up,” Xi’s China will be “going out” to the world.
But how should this New Era be viewed in the context of modern Chinese history, and what might it reveal about the nature of Xi’s power?
In the twentieth century, China was governed by three regimes: the Qing dynasty, followed by the establishment of the Republic of China in 1912, and, since 1949, the People’s Republic of China.
The history of the PRC is further divided into two periods: the Mao era (1949-1976) and the reform era.
During the Mao years, the Republican era – with its “united front” politics and the development of civil society– looked like a brief interlude between periods of autocracy.
Yet, during the PRC’s reform period, it was the tumult of the Mao era that looked like the aberration, even to the CPC, which sought to distance itself from what it called “leftist mistakes.”
With the success of Deng’s “socialism with Chinese characteristics,” China’s economic miracle appeared to confirm that the country was firmly on the path toward development and modernization.
Changing perceptions of China’s trajectory have been reflected in America’s relationship with the country.
Indeed, in 1943, the wife of China’s Nationalist leader Chiang Kai-shek testified before the US Congress about how US President Franklin D. Roosevelt’s “four freedoms” applied to a China at war with Japan.
But the belief that the US-China relationship was based on shared values was dashed by the CPC’s victory in 1949, leading to the suggestion that the US had somehow “lost China.”
Such hopes were revived, to some extent, with the reestablishment of diplomatic relations and, later, the reform era.
Believing that economic development and a growing middle class would lead to political liberalization, the US again engaged with China.
This hope was reinforced through the 1990s and 2000s, when officials began to experiment with elections at the village level, and the CPC leadership changed regularly after two terms.
As the journalist Jim Mann once argued, it was the expectation of political reform that underlay US interactions with China, even after the massacre in Tiananmen Square in 1989.
While China’s per capita income was rising, and its middle class was growing, democracy did not arrive.
Political scientists stopped predicting the CPC’s collapse and began asking instead why the one-party authoritarian state has been so resilient, and whether the period of reform and opening up had come to an end.
As Xi’s “New Era” shows, the answer is a resounding yes.
Instead of allowing the Internet to result in greater freedom, China’s government constructed a Great Firewall.
At the same time, it developed what political scientists call “digital Leninism,” in which the latest technology enables an unprecedented level of state surveillance.
Instead, the government has maintained control of the most important state-owned enterprises, and the private enterprise that is conducted serves state priorities.
In the realm of politics, democratic experimentation is confined to the local level, permitted only insofar as it strengthens CPC rule.
So was the reform era yet another aberration in China’s history, not unlike the Republican period?
One way to approach this question is to imagine modern Chinese history as resembling the double-helix structure of DNA, comprising a strand of openness and one of authoritarianism.
For example, many think of the reform era, especially the 1980s, as a time of pluralistic political discourse and an increasingly vibrant civil society.
But it was also defined by adherence to Deng’s “four cardinal principles”: the socialist road; the people’s democratic dictatorship; the leadership of the CPC; and Marxism, Leninism, and Mao Zedong Thought.
Just as Deng presided over China’s reform and opening up, he presided over the Tiananmen Square massacre.
Similarly, while the Republican era had its new universities and professions (including lawyers), it also had Chiang Kai-shek’s “White Terror” and the conservative “New Life” movement.
In short, even when the Chinese tapestry featured a reformist weft, it was always woven into an authoritarian warp.
In Xi’s “New Era,” it is the authoritarian strand that is dominant.
In November, Dubai announced the construction of a solar energy park that will produce electricity for less than $0.06 per kilowatt-hour – undercutting the cost of the alternative investment option, a gas or coal-fired power plant.
The plant – which is expected to be operational in 2017 – is yet another harbinger of a future in which renewable energy crowds out conventional fossil fuels.
Indeed, hardly a week seems to pass without news of a major deal to construct a solar power plant.
In February alone, there were announcements of new solar power projects in Nigeria (1,000 megawatts), Australia (2,000 MW), and India (10,000 MW).
There can be no doubting that these developments are good for the fight against climate change.
But the major consideration driving them is profit, not the environment, as increased efficiency in energy distribution and, where necessary, storage, reduces the cost of producing renewable energy.
As efforts to improve the management of electricity from fluctuating sources yield further advances, the cost of solar power will continue to fall.
Within ten years, it will be produced in many regions around the globe for 4-6 cents per kilowatt-hour, according to a recent study by the Fraunhofer Institute for Solar Energy Systems (commissioned by the think tank Agora Energiewende).
By 2050, production costs will fall to 2-4 cents per kilowatt-hour.
As Patrick Graichen, Agora’s executive director, points out, most forecasts of the world’s future energy supply fail to take into account solar power’s looming victory over its fossil-fuel competitors.
Updating them would paint a realistic picture of the costs and impact of our energy production and consumption on the world’s climate, reveal the importance of renewable energy to economic development, and enable better planning of energy infrastructure.
We should not underestimate the tremendous potential the sun and wind have for building global wealth and fighting poverty.
As solar power becomes increasingly cost-effective, countries located within the planet’s sun belt could develop entirely new business models as cheap, clean energy enables them to process their raw materials locally, adding value – and profit – prior to export.
Unlike large-scale conventional power plants, solar installations can be built in months; in addition to being cost-effective, they provide a quick means of responding to growing global demand.
And, because solar plants can generally be operated independently of complex interregional electricity grids, they provide less developed countries a way to electrify their economies without building expensive new infrastructure.
Solar power plants thus could play the same role for energy that mobile phones did for telecommunications: rapidly reaching large, underserved communities in sparsely populated regions, without the need to invest in the cables and accompanying infrastructure that once would have been necessary.
In Africa, 66% of the population has gained access to electronic communications since 2000.
There is no reason why solar power could not do likewise for access to electricity.
For starters, construction costs for solar power plants are finally low enough to produce electricity at a competitive, stable price for more than 25 years.
The price of oil may have plunged for now, but it will rise again.
Even more important, the cost of capital currently is very low in many countries.
This is a decisive factor for the economic viability of solar power plants, because they need very little maintenance but require relatively high upfront investment.
The Fraunhofer study shows that differences in capital expenditure are as important for costs per kilowatt-hour as differences in sunlight.
Solar power is currently cheaper in cloudy Germany than in sunny regions where the cost of borrowing is higher.
But the cost of capital is something over which a country can maintain a certain amount of control.
By creating a stable legal framework, providing credit guarantees in the context of international agreements, and involving central banks in large-scale investments, governments can help to make solar power more accessible.
Factors like these explain why international climate policies increasingly focus not only on solar power, but on other forms of renewable energy as well.
Technological breakthroughs have boosted these energy sources’ competitiveness relative to fossil fuels.
As a result, instruments that make their adoption more affordable are becoming some of the most important weapons we have in the fight against climate change.
LONDON – As people in the developed world wonder how their countries will return to full employment after the Great Recession, it might benefit us to take a look at a visionary essay that John Maynard Keynes wrote in 1930, called “Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren.”
Keynes’s General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money, published in 1936, equipped governments with the intellectual tools to counter the unemployment caused by slumps.
In this earlier essay, however, Keynes distinguished between unemployment caused by temporary economic breakdowns and what he called “technological unemployment” – that is, “unemployment due to the discovery of means of economizing the use of labor outrunning the pace at which we can find new uses for labor.”
Keynes reckoned that we would hear much more about this kind of unemployment in the future.
But its emergence, he thought, was a cause for hope, rather than despair.
For it showed that the developed world, at least, was on track to solving the “economic problem” – the problem of scarcity that kept mankind tethered to a burdensome life of toil.
Machines were rapidly replacing human labor, holding out the prospect of vastly increased production at a fraction of the existing human effort.
In fact, Keynes thought that by about now (the early twenty-first century) most people would have to work only 15 hours a week to produce all that they needed for subsistence and comfort.
Developed countries are now about as rich as Keynes thought they would be, but most of us work much longer than 15 hours a week, though we do take longer holidays, and work has become less physically demanding, so we also live longer.
But, in broad terms, the prophecy of vastly increased leisure for all has not been fulfilled.
Automation has been proceeding apace, but most of us who work still put in an average of 40 hours a week.
At the same time, “technological unemployment” has been on the rise.
Since the 1980’s, we have never regained the full employment levels of the 1950’s and 1960’s.
If most people still work a 40-hour week, a substantial and growing minority have had unwanted leisure thrust upon them in the form of unemployment, under-employment, and forced withdrawal from the labor market.
And, as we recover from the current recession, most experts expect this group to grow even larger.
What this means is that we have largely failed to convert growing technological unemployment into increased voluntary leisure.
The main reason for this is that the lion’s share of the productivity gains achieved over the last 30 years has been seized by the well-off.
Particularly in the United States and Britain since the 1980’s, we have witnessed a return to the capitalism “red in tooth and claw” depicted by Karl Marx.
The rich and very rich have gotten very much richer, while everyone else’s incomes have stagnated.
So most people are not, in fact, four or five times better off than they were in 1930.
It is not surprising that they are working longer than Keynes thought they would.
Satisfying it has become the great palliative of modern society, our counterfeit reward for working irrational hours.
Advertisers proclaim a single message: your soul is to be discovered in your shopping.
Aristotle knew of insatiability only as a personal vice; he had no inkling of the collective, politically orchestrated insatiability that we call economic growth.
The civilization of “always more” would have struck him as moral and political madness.
This is not just or mainly because we will soon enough run up against the natural limits to growth.
It is because we cannot go on for much longer economizing on labor faster than we can find new uses for it.
That road leads to a division of society into a minority of producers, professionals, supervisors, and financial speculators on one side, and a majority of drones and unemployables on the other.
Apart from its moral implications, such a society would face a classic dilemma: how to reconcile the relentless pressure to consume with stagnant earnings.
So far, the answer has been to borrow, leading to today’s massive debt overhangs in advanced economies.
Obviously, this is unsustainable, and thus is no answer at all, for it implies periodic collapse of the wealth-producing machine.
The truth is that we cannot go on successfully automating our production without rethinking our attitudes toward consumption, work, leisure, and the distribution of income.
Without such efforts of social imagination, recovery from the current crisis will simply be a prelude to more shattering calamities in the future.
LAHORE – Although 2012 saw an accelerating drawdown of United States and NATO forces’ in Afghanistan, a grim aspect of that decade-long war – reliance on air strikes by unmanned drones – continued unabated.
Indeed, those attacks were stepped up, with America’s use of drone warfare in Pakistan reaching an unprecedented height over the past year.
With President Barack Obama re-elected and no longer facing the pressure of a campaign, it would be in America’s interest – and certainly in the interests of my country, Pakistan – to use the first year of his new term to de-escalate the violence.
America’s drone strikes in Pakistan reflect an arrogant frame of mind that fails to distinguish between the guilty and the innocent, between the perpetrator and the afflicted, and between the criminal and the aggrieved.
By banishing all trappings of justice, this mindset is oblivious to the suffering of the peace-loving civilians who comprise the vast majority of those living in Pakistan’s tribal areas.
The US drone strikes have left behind a long trail of death of innocent civilians, with no one being held accountable.
These remote-controlled flying machines are programmed to decimate, brutally and indiscriminately.
It is shameful that a country known for its democratic values and its unparalleled commitment to human freedom should stoop so low as to kill innocent men, women, and children.
As a result, instead of winning hearts and minds, the US, with the constant humming of killer drones in the air, is driving fear into every living soul in the tribal areas.
Indeed, the bloody irony is that the strategy is utterly counter-productive; the people of the tribal areas, with their warrior past, end up joining the militants, justifying their actions as jihad against the forces occupying Afghanistan and their helpers in Pakistan.
Indeed, according to a recent report by researchers at New York University School of Law and Stanford Law School, the people in the areas targeted by the drone campaign are being systematically terrorized.
The drone strategy constitutes a campaign of terror – highly effective terror in which even funerals of drone victims have been targeted.
In one particularly notorious case, 40 maliks (tribal leaders) holding a jirga (tribal assembly) were burned in an indiscriminate attack.
Alongside many luminaries around the world, former US President Jimmy Carter has condemned Obama’s barbaric drone policy.
According to WikiLeaks, former Prime Minister Yousaf Raza Gilani approved the US drone strikes, saying: “I don’t care if they do it as long as they get the right people.
President Asif Ali Zardari went even further, saying that he did not care about the “collateral damage.”
So Pakistan’s government has failed in its principal responsibility, enshrined in its constitution, to safeguard the lives and property of its citizens, as well as the country’s security and sovereignty.
More than 40,000 citizens have been killed since the beginning of the US war in Afghanistan, because Pakistan’s government criminally collaborates with forces that facilitated its rise to power.
And, in the face of ongoing military operations, most schools in Waziristan have remain closed for the past 7 years, depriving a generation of children of education and opportunity.
The road to peace in South Asia runs through restive Waziristan.
Despite countless sacrifices in the face of the drone strikes’ arbitrary cruelty, the resolve of the tribal areas’ people remains undented.
While they continue to seek peace, they are not willing to compromise their honor and self-respect, however daunting the challenges they confront.
The true face of their cultural patrimony and proud traditions must be brought to the world’s attention, so that their dream of peace with honor can be realized.
But this can happen only when the US and Pakistani governments disengage from their “war on terror.”
Indeed, only when Pakistan is no longer perceived as fighting a US war will local militants stop thinking of the conflict as a jihad against foreign intervention.
Peace will come when the tribal people, in their hundreds and thousands, no longer see a reason to fight.
In short, the drone strikes constitute a flawed policy that has only strengthened anti-US sentiment and the forces of extremism in Pakistan.
America’s killing machines have failed to subjugate the area’s proud people – a failure that underlies the US decision to withdraw from Afghanistan by 2014.
I believe that the withdrawal should come even sooner, so that the US can avoid leaving behind a legacy of animosity that may continue to haunt it for generations.
Only a rapid change of course by the Obama administration in 2013 can begin to counteract the enmity toward the US that has been generated by more than a decade of its forces’ lethal presence in the region.
America’s drone war, with its wanton destruction of families and communities, is deepening that antipathy.
To get peace in Afghanistan, indeed all of South Asia, the US needs to give peace a chance!
In recent days, Italy’s government fell after losing a parliamentary vote on the country’s troop deployment in Afghanistan, while Britain and Denmark announced that they are to begin withdrawing their troops from Iraq.
Whereas the Bush administration is deploying an additional 21,000 American soldiers in Iraq, and is pushing for more allied troops in Afghanistan, America’s allies are rejecting its Middle East policy.
They are increasingly convinced that “victory” will be elusive in any asymmetric conflict between states, however powerful, and religiously driven armed insurgents.
Donald Rumsfeld’s dogma of military “transformation” – the technological upgrading of an army’s capacity to enable decisive victory with fewer troops – failed resoundingly in Iraq.
Nor could Israel, with its overwhelming technological advantage, defeat Hezbollah in Lebanon.
More rockets and missiles fell on northern Israel in 33 days than hit Britain during all of World War II.
So the Israelis now must reckon with an entirely new phenomenon: an asymmetric entity, Hezbollah, with nation-state firepower.
So the fierce debate over whether to increase the size of American ground forces in Iraq is beside the point.
Neither the Soviet experience in Afghanistan in the 1980’s nor NATO’s today vindicates the claim that troop numbers are what matter most on the modern battlefield.
When geo-strategic military front lines are non-existent, as in Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq, mass no longer equals victory.
The great military thinker Carl von Clausewitz’s notion of “decisive battles” as the “center of gravity” of war is simply irrelevant to conflicts that have no visible “center of gravity.”
Indeed, while wars from the time of Hannibal’s defeat of the Romans in 216 B.C. to the Gulf War of 1991 had this center of gravity, with a massive concentration of force capable of bringing an enemy to its knees, such industrial inter-state wars have now become an historical anachronism.
Most states nowadays lie within borders that are widely accepted as legitimate, and they increasingly abide by international norms of behavior in times of war.
In fact, the obligation of states to abide by humanitarian rules of conduct while their enemies are free to barbarize warfare is what makes asymmetric wars especially insoluble.
Moreover, in an era of global media and international war crimes courts, the criteria for states’ use of military force have become more complex than ever.
Inter-state combat may still occur where strategic front lines can be found, such as Israel’s border with Syria, India’s border with Pakistan, and the border dividing the two Koreas.
In such cases, war, as the Egyptians showed in 1973, might still serve as an avenue to resolving a conflict.
The Syrians might be tempted to launch an offensive against Israel with the objective of breaking the deadlock over the future of the Golan Heights.
However, in the case of Kashmir, the asymmetric conflict currently fought by proxies and terrorist groups might not degenerate into all-out war precisely because India and Pakistan have mutual nuclear deterrence.Indeed, such asymmetric conflicts through proxies have become the new conventional way that states avoid the price of a general war.
This changing nature of the battlefield essentially means that war as a conclusive event in an international conflict has become obsolete.
The facile Clausewitzian wisdom that military action ultimately leads to a political solution is no longer convincing.
“Victory” cannot bring peace, simply because there will always be a war after the war.
Thus, for example, the conventional war in Kosovo lasted for two months, only to usher in a six-year asymmetric conflict.
Likewise, America’s three-week “shock and awe” campaign in Iraq in 2003 ended in “victory,” but opened the gates of hell for occupiers and ordinary Iraqis alike.
And six months after the merciless pounding of southern Lebanon, Hezbollah is as strong as it was before.
Nor does the return of the Taliban in Afghanistan six years after their overthrow now seen too far-fetched.
It is during the war after the war that the occupier’s inferiority is revealed, with constant reinforcements increasing the number of targets for the insurgents far more quickly than the occupier can adapt to the changing battlefield.
The insurgents in Iraq, as the British admit, were able in just three years to cope with their enemies’ technological superiority in a way that the IRA in Northern Ireland was unable to do in 30 years.
The Iraq war and Israel’s wars with Hamas and Hezbollah show the limits of what military power can achieve, as well as vindicate diplomacy and conflict resolution.
When it comes to tackling complex political and cultural conflicts, forging international and regional alliances around a legitimate objective is more important than sheer military capacity.
That said, it would be dangerously naïve to believe that the exercise of power and the capacity to intimidate are unnecessary.
But the objectives of the use of force need to be linked to the recognition that in today’s asymmetric conflicts, victory is no longer achieved on the battlefield.
Only better-informed foreign policies that can address the genuine anxieties of civilizations in crisis will yield more sustainable results.
It is a pattern that is all too common, and it is one that, sadly, is being repeated in Nepal.
More than a week after the earthquake and aftershocks killed more than 7,000 people and devastated the capital, Kathmandu, and despite the mobilization of massive amounts of aid from international agencies, the country’s finance minister had yet to receive any of the money promised by foreign countries.
Disaster aid for education in such circumstances almost always flows far too slowly, because there is no central pool of funds available to be distributed when a crisis erupts.
More than 1.7 million children require immediate aid, according to UNICEF Australia.
More than 16,000 schools have been damaged, including some 5,000 that were completely destroyed.
Of the 500 schools in the hard-hit Gorkha district, 450 have been leveled or are now derelict.
According to the UN resident coordinator, there has been a quick airlift and supply of materials – such as the well-known “School in a Box,” a pre-packaged educational kit suitable for teaching up to 40 children, Early Childhood Development Kit, and Recreation Kits – for displaced boys and girls.
In the meantime, the best that can be hoped for Nepal’s children is that tents and shelters can be brought in to create Child-Friendly Spaces.
Schools that remain intact are now housing the homeless, and school buses have been requisitioned to help victims travel out of Kathmandu.
As the death toll spirals upward and the full horror unfolds, much of the relief effort is on hold, unable to move ahead until the funds that have been promised arrive – a process that could take weeks or months.
With established pools of aid being stretched to address immediate needs – medical assistance, shelter, and food – education is being neglected.
Indeed, only a fraction of humanitarian aid budgets, roughly 1%, is allocated to education.
Meanwhile, long-term development budgets are set in stone years in advance and lack the flexibility to respond to natural and man-made disasters.
A humanitarian fund for education in emergencies needs to be established, and soon, so that when calamity strikes, vulnerable children are not forced to wait in misery and insecurity while the adults pass around the begging bowl.
Such a pool of money would help the roughly 50% of the world’s children who are out of school – some 28 million boys and girls – because of conflicts, civil wars, or humanitarian emergencies.
It would have been helpful during the Ebola outbreak, when extra funding would have helped to reopen schools quickly, rather than leaving five million children unable to pursue their studies.
It could provide opportunities for students in Iraq and Palestine whose schools were destroyed and have yet to be reopened, as well as for some half-million Syrian children in Lebanon, displaced by four years of mayhem.
In the case of Nepal and other disaster-prone regions, the fund could, and should, be used to strengthen immediate relief plans, improve coordinated responses, and support longer-term efforts to bridge humanitarian relief and development, including preventive measures, such as retrofitting schools.
Initial reports following the recent disaster suggest that schools that were retrofitted as a precaution against earthquakes (the typical cost was $8,000) escaped most of the damage.
No one is asking donors to make education a priority over immediate life-saving responses, or that financing be diverted from other emergency relief efforts.
But it is crucial to realize that, for children, educational opportunity underpins all humanitarian and development interventions.
Schools provide more than the skills that children will need in later life; they also serve as vehicles for disseminating lifesaving health and safety information.
The average refugee child spends more than ten years in exile; that child’s education cannot wait until he or she is able to return home.
Education may not provide humanitarian support in exactly the same way that the provision of medical care, food, or shelter does, but the risks facing children out of school during crises – including labor, marriage, human trafficking, and recruitment as soldiers – can be as grim as any other type of suffering.
On July 7, the Norwegian government will convene a conference on education in Oslo.
The assembled leaders and policymakers should take the opportunity to heed the call of organizations – such as the International Network for Education in Emergencies, UNICEF, and UNHCR – to ensure that no child falls into the gap between humanitarian and development assistance.
Schools provide their students with something that no other service or humanitarian assistance program can offer: hope of a return to normalcy and of a future worth planning for after those delivering the emergency response have left.
SINGAPORE – The time has come to think the unthinkable: the era of American dominance in international affairs may well be coming to an end.
As that moment approaches, the main question will be how well the United States is prepared for it.
Asia’s rise over the last few decades is more than a story of rapid economic growth.
It is the story of a region undergoing a renaissance in which people’s minds are re-opened and their outlook refreshed.
Asia’s movement toward resuming its former central role in the global economy has so much momentum that it is virtually unstoppable.
While the transformation may not always be seamless, there is no longer room to doubt that an Asian century is on the horizon, and that the world’s chemistry will change fundamentally.
Global leaders – whether policymakers or intellectuals – bear a responsibility to prepare their societies for impending global shifts.
Last year, at the World Economic Forum in Davos, two US senators, one member of the US House of Representatives, and a deputy national security adviser participated in a forum on the future of American power (I was the chair).
When asked what future they anticipated for American power, they predictably declared that the US would remain the world’s most powerful country.
When asked whether America was prepared to become the world’s second-largest economy, they were reticent.
Their reaction was understandable: even entertaining the possibility of the US becoming “number two” amounts to career suicide for an American politician.
Elected officials everywhere must adjust, to varying degrees, to fulfill the expectations of those who put them in office.
Intellectuals, on the other hand, have a special obligation to think the unthinkable and speak the unspeakable.
They are supposed to consider all possibilities, even disagreeable ones, and prepare the population for prospective developments.
Richard Haass, the president of the Council on Foreign Relations, suggested recently that the US “could already be in the second decade of another American century.”
Likewise, Clyde Prestowitz, the president of the Economic Strategy Institute, has said that “this century may well wind up being another American century.”
To be sure, such predictions may well prove accurate; if they do, the rest of the world will benefit.
A strong and dynamic US economy, reinvigorated by cheap shale gas and accelerating innovation, would rejuvenate the global economy as a whole.
If the world’s center of gravity shifts to Asia, however, Americans will be woefully unprepared.
Many Americans remain shockingly unaware of how much the rest of the world, especially Asia, has progressed.
With 3% of the world’s population, the US can no longer dominate the rest of the world, because Asians, with 60% of the world’s population, are no longer underperforming.
But the belief that America is the only virtuous country, the sole beacon of light in a dark and unstable world, continues to shape many Americans’ worldview.
American intellectuals’ failure to challenge these ideas – and to help the US population shed complacent attitudes based on ignorance – perpetuates a culture of coddling the public.
But, while Americans tend to receive only good news, Asia’s rise is not really bad news.
The US should recognize that Asian countries are seeking not to dominate the West, but to emulate it.
They seek to build strong and dynamic middle classes and to achieve the kind of peace, stability, and prosperity that the West has long enjoyed.
This deep social and intellectual transformation underway in Asia promises to catapult it from economic power to global leadership.
China, which remains a closed society in many ways, has an open mind, whereas the US is an open society with a closed mind.
With Asia’s middle class set to skyrocket from roughly 500 million people today to 1.75 billion by 2020, the US will not be able to avoid the global economy’s new realities for much longer.
The world is poised to undergo one of the most dramatic power shifts in human history.
In order to be prepared for the transformation, Americans must abandon ingrained ideas and old assumptions, and liberate unthinkable thoughts.
LONDON – Speaking in the happier economic times of 2005, Mervyn King – then, as now, Governor of the Bank of England – stressed the importance of entrenching public expectations of stable, low inflation.
He warned that, “if you let inflation expectations drift too far away from the target, you can end up in quite serious difficulty with a costly process to bring them back again.”
The Bank of England’s own commissioned quarterly surveys of public attitudes reveal that the credibility of its Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has now been impaired.
For the last 15 months, the 2% inflation target, which is set by the government and is supposed to be enforced by the Bank of England, has been exceeded by more than a full percentage point.
For most of this period, the British public expected inflation in the coming year to be lower than in the previous year, thanks to the MPC’s strong track record on price stability.
That confidence has now dissipated: inflation expectations have caught up with the actual inflation rate of 4%.
The fear is that tightening monetary policy to bear down on inflation could snuff out the faltering economic recovery.
So not only has the MPC kept interest rates at a rock-bottom 0.5% since 2009, but policy has been loosened further by the Bank of England’s so-called “quantitative easing” – that is, expanding the monetary base by the stroke of a pen in the hope of reinvigorating domestic credit markets.
But the United Kingdom is now faced with the worst outcome: stagflation.
The economy is incurring the inflationary costs of the Bank’s policy while missing out on the intended benefit of growth.
In the US, where the Federal Reserve is running a similarly loose monetary policy, the situation looks rosier – at least at first sight.
The US economy is staging a more convincing recovery than the UK, and, in contrast to the Bank of England and the European Central Bank, the Fed is not explicitly mandated by Congress to achieve a specific inflation target.
Thus, compared to the Bank of England, the all-important credibility of the monetary authority seems less vulnerable in the case of the Fed.
But, even in the US, policy-setting officials, such as Thomas Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, express concern that inflation expectations may become unanchored, owing to the massive expansion of government debt and the Fed’s balance sheet since the financial crash in 2008.
All the major Western central banks – including even the traditionally “hawkish” ECB – appear to be sticking their heads in the sand.
But there is something they can do to ensure the benefits of inflation-targeting rules (credibility and well-anchored inflation expectations) while also supporting recovery: raise the stated target.
The case for doing so can best be shown by Britain, where the situation is particularly delicate.
The UK authorities have decided to prioritize fiscal consolidation while running a loose monetary policy to contain risks to the recovery from higher taxes and lower government spending.
The thinking is clear (if rarely spelled out clearly by politicians): whereas a loss of market confidence in the British state’s solvency would most likely trigger a depression, above-target inflation can be rectified at a relatively tolerable cost to living standards (though higher than it should have been).
Granting, for the sake of argument, the force of this logic (and even its critics could hardly deny its coherence), it would be foolish to underestimate the risk of runaway inflation and underplay the economic and social harm it would cause.
To the extent that tolerance of above-target inflation also reflects a desire to erode the real value of public and private debts, market interest rates could soar, leaving indebted governments and households in even greater trouble.
Many commentators believe that governments’ huge budget constraints will force them to rely on inflation.
If so, it is better to do it transparently, unlike the Bank of England.
Simply put, in order to anchor inflation expectations effectively, inflation targets must be realistic.
The current high-stakes conundrum faced by policymakers suggests that they should apply inflation-targeting principles more flexibly in the context of a major economic shock.
This would involve raising the target to a level in line with the actual inflation rate observed in the post-crisis period – a level that the public would perceive as realistic, honest, and credible.
Doing so would reduce the debt and tax burdens on future generations, while crucially limiting the risks of much higher inflation in the nearer term.
Moreover, a higher inflation target – and the restoration of credibility that it would imply – would enable central banks to return to a lower inflation target without creating a recession once debt levels had been reduced and aggregate demand had recovered.
COPENHAGEN – President Donald Trump’s withdrawal of the United States from the Paris climate agreement leaves the US without a global warming policy.
But the world’s response – to double down on the pact in opposition to Trump – should also cause concern.
There have been two conflicting responses to Trump’s decision – often heard from the very same person.
Former US Vice President Al Gore says that Trump is damaging “humanity’s ability to solve the climate crisis.”
Business leader Tom Steyer says the Paris accord is “essential to leaving a healthy, safe, and prosperous world to our children” and blasts the president’s “traitorous act of war.”
On the other hand, we hear the defiant suggestion that Trump’s decision might not be so important, because renewable energy is already becoming so cheap that a future without fossil fuels has nearly arrived.
Gore claims the planet is in the midst of an “inevitable transition to a clean energy economy,” and Steyer recently said that the time when “renewables plus storage is cheaper than fossil fuels” has already arrived.
Abandoning the Paris agreement does not risk our planet’s future, because the agreement itself does little to solve global warming.
And green energy is far from locked in as a cost-effective replacement for fossil fuels.
To keep the increase in global temperature below the target of 2°C (relative to the preindustrial era), the planet needs to reduce carbon dioxide emissions during this century by about 6,000 billion tons.
The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) – the organizer of the Paris accord – estimates that even if every country makes every promised cut, CO2 emissions would fall by just 56 billion tons by 2030.
The UN’s own figures reveal that even in an implausibly optimistic, best-case scenario, the Paris accord would leave 99% of the climate problem in place.
Moreover, even before Trump announced his decision, it was unlikely that every country would fulfill every promise.
The inadequacies of the Paris agreement were acknowledged by environmentalists at the time it was signed, though some are changing their tune, in order to stand steadfastly against Trump.
Back in 2015, the noted environmentalist Bill McKibben concluded that the accord did just enough “to keep both environmentalists and the fossil fuel industry from complaining too much.”
Now, he fears the withdrawal “undercuts our civilization’s chances of surviving global warming.”
There is nothing new in the politicization of climate policy or the over-selling of a political agreement.
But the deeper problem is that a lot of puffery about the state of renewable energy has accompanied the Paris hype.
“A largely or wholly solar economy can be constructed in the United States with straightforward soft technologies that are now demonstrated and now economic or nearly economic,” environmentalist Amory Lovins declared in 1976.
In 1984, the Worldwatch Institute assured us that wind subsidies “will not be needed within a few years.”
In fact, the world will spend $125 billion on wind and solar subsidies alone in 2017.
Despite four decades of financial support, the International Energy Agency (IEA) reports that wind provides just 0.5% of today’s energy needs, and solar photovoltaic a minuscule 0.1%.
More than $3 trillion will be spent on subsidies just on wind and solar photovoltaic over the next 25 years.
Even by 2040, and assuming that all of the Paris agreement’s promises are fulfilled, the IEA expects wind and solar to provide, respectively, just 1.9% and 1% of global energy.
This is not what an economy in the midst of an “inevitable” shift away from fossil fuels looks like.
Solar and wind energy depend on considerable subsidies because in most contexts, they remain more expensive than fossil fuels.
Spain was once paying almost 1% of its GDP in renewable subsidies, more than it spent on higher education.
Green energy investors and politicians lead the public-relations advance, assisted by a credulous media that likes to tell green-technology “success” stories.
But if green energy were already competitive or near-competitive with fossil fuels, the Paris agreement would be unnecessary.
Hyping the effects of the Paris agreement and the state of today’s green energy gives us false assurance.
We believe that we are doing what is required to “save the planet,” Trump’s move notwithstanding.
And we don’t focus on what we actually need to do to rein in temperature rises.
It’s not very complicated: We must end wasteful subsidies for both fossil fuels and inefficient solar and wind.
Governments and donors must spend much more on research and development than they do now.
The fund announced by philanthropist Bill Gates is a very promising start, as is the agreement by 22 countries and the European Union double their investments from $15 billion to $30 billion.
But, to reduce temperatures by more than a fraction of a degree, the planet needs something more like a sixfold increase in green energy R&D. This would still be much cheaper than the Paris agreement, which requires the rollout of expensive, inefficient energy.
Trump richly deserves criticism for abandoning the Paris climate agreement without any alternative plan of action.
But, by ignoring reality, the rest of the world is not doing much better.
LAGOS – When I was a boy, growing up in Kano in northern Nigeria, my Koranic teacher was totally crippled from the waist down.
That was 50 years ago, and I did not know that it was polio.
At the time, I never imagined that all of this damage could have been prevented with an easily administered vaccination – that, had these people been immunized, they would have been spared paralysis.
In the six decades since the first polio vaccination was created, the disease has been eradicated in most countries around the world.
Even countries facing significant obstacles – such as India, with a population of 1.2 billion people, rampant poverty, and inadequate infrastructure – have rid themselves of polio.
Nigeria is one of only three countries – along with Afghanistan and Pakistan – that remains blighted by polio.
Kano is one of the few places in the world where three different strains of the disease were recorded in 2012.
Moreover, it is the largest recipient of foreign direct investment in Africa, and thriving Nigerian businesses – such as my own – have begun to expand internationally.
As a result, Nigeria will soon surpass South Africa to become Africa’s largest economy.
Nigerians cannot hope to lead Africa, economically or otherwise, while neglecting to eliminate preventable diseases like polio.
I am working with the Nigerian government and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation to take needed – and long-overdue – action to eradicate polio in the country.
In Kano – which currently has one of the lowest routine immunization coverage rates in Nigeria, with less than 40% of children vaccinated – we are working to improve primary health care and expand the scope of routine immunization.
Now state governments and officials should also seize this opportunity and help to ensure that this essential health service is delivered to all children.
Vaccine providers need support, supervision, and the right incentives to ensure that they perform as expected.
With better mapping of missed settlements, a more stable supply of vaccine, and improved distribution systems, such oversights would be avoided, and more children could be reached.
Provided adequate funding, solid infrastructure, and genuine commitment from the country’s leaders, every child in Nigeria could be immunized against a range of diseases.
Nigeria’s President Goodluck Jonathan is determined to eradicate polio in my hometown and throughout the country.
With one exception - the actual military "victory," which looks increasingly Pyrrhic - President Bush's Iraqi adventure has been marked by repeated failures.
Scant signs of weapons of mass destruction have been found, and, according to David Kay, America's chief arms inspector, the stockpiles either never existed or were destroyed years ago.
So Bush simply ignored the data, gathered by Hans Blix's UN inspectors, and the evidence on which he based his case for war seems to have been largely fabricated.
Worse still, it is now clear that Bush never had a plan for when the war ended.
Instead of moving towards peace and democracy, the situation in Iraq remains so dangerous that Paul Bremer, the American occupation leader, is using instability as his rationale for avoiding democratic elections this year.
Of course, America tried to keep real order in some places, revealing a lot about what it truly valued in Iraq.
When Baghdad fell, the oil ministry was quickly protected, while museums and hospitals were allowed to be looted.
If there was not outright corruption in the $7 billion in contracts awarded to Halliburton, whose former chairman was Vice President Dick Cheney, there was undoubtedly a strong whiff of crony capitalism.
Halliburton and its subsidiaries have been ensnared in charges of war profiteering ever since, and have had to pay back millions of dollars to the US government.
Now, everyone agrees, the most important task - beyond creating a democratic state and restoring security - is reconstructing the economy.
Blinded by ideology, however, the Bush administration seems determined to continue its record of dismal failures by ignoring past experience.
When the Berlin Wall fell, the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union began transitions to a market economy, with heated debates over how this should be accomplished.
One choice was shock therapy - quick privatization of state-owned assets and abrupt liberalization of trade, prices, and capital flows - while the other was gradual market liberalization to allow for the rule of law to be established at the same time.
Today, there is a broad consensus that shock therapy, at least at the level of microeconomic reforms, failed, and that countries (Hungary, Poland, and Slovenia) that took the gradualist approach to privatization and the reconstruction of institutional infrastructure managed their transitions far better than those that tried to leapfrog into a laissez-faire economy.
Social indicators, such as life expectancy, mirrored the dismal GDP numbers.
More than a decade after the beginning of the transition, many postcommunist countries have not even returned to pre-transition income levels.
Worse, the prognosis for establishing a stable democracy and the rule of law in most shock-therapy countries looks bleak.
But the Bush administration, backed by a few handpicked Iraqis, is pushing Iraq towards an even more radical form of shock therapy than was pursued in the former Soviet world.
Indeed, shock therapy's advocates argue that its failures were due not to excessive speed - too much shock and not enough therapy - but to insufficient shock.
There are, of course, similarities and differences between the former communist countries and Iraq.
But the Gulf War and sanctions weakened Iraq's economy much more than communism weakened the USSR's.
Moreover, while both Russia and Iraq are heavily dependent on natural resources, Russia at least possessed demonstrated abilities in some other areas.
To be sure, Russians went decades without opportunities to exercise entrepreneurship, while Ba'athist rule did not suppress Iraq's merchant class and entrepreneurial spirit in any comparable way.
But Iraq's location puts it at a distinct disadvantage compared to Russia and many postcommunist states: none of Iraq's neighbors is doing particularly well economically, while many postcommunist countries sat next door to the European Union during the 1990's boom.
Most importantly, ongoing instability in the Middle East will deter foreign investment (other than in the oil sector).
These factors, together with the ongoing occupation, make quick privatization particularly problematic.
The low prices that the privatized assets are likely to fetch will create the sense of an illegitimate sell-off foisted on the country by the occupiers and their collaborators.
Without legitimacy, any purchaser will worry about the security of his property rights, which will contribute to even lower prices.
Furthermore, those buying privatized assets may then be reluctant to invest in them; instead, as happened elsewhere, their efforts may be directed more at asset stripping than at wealth creation.
If Iraq's prospects are as dismal as my analysis suggests, any international contribution to the US-driven reconstruction effort is likely to be little more than money flushed down the drain.
But the international community should direct its money to humanitarian causes, such as hospitals and schools, rather than backing American designs.
Piling more debt onto Iraq's already huge obligations will only make matters worse.
If Iraq's economy falters as a result of a misguided economic reconstruction program based on shock therapy, the country will be further indebted with little to show for it.
The dream of Iraq's American invaders was to create a stable, prosperous, and democratic Middle East.
But America's economic program for reconstructing Iraq is laying the foundations for poverty and chaos.
BERKELEY – The Brexit debate is an endless source of mirth for anyone with a dark sense of humor.
My own favorite quote is from Michael Gove, currently Britain’s environment secretary.
Just prior to the June 2016 Brexit referendum, Gove, who was justice secretary in David Cameron’s government at the time, dismissed the all-but-unanimous view of economists and others that a decision to leave the European Union would deeply damage the British economy.
“People in this country have had enough of experts,” Gove testily explained, referring to “experts from organizations with acronyms, saying they know what is best and getting it consistently wrong.”
The early post-referendum evidence suggested, to the surprise of many – or at least to many of the experts – that Gove was right and they were wrong.
There was in fact no immediate recession in the United Kingdom following the Brexit vote; indeed, there was not even a slowdown in growth.
To explain this, observers pointed to the nimble response of the Bank of England (BoE), which cut interest rates to prevent any softening of demand.
They pointed to the big post-referendum depreciation of the pound, which promised to make British exports more competitive and offset any problems with the transition to a new trade regime.
They suggested that a UK freed of burdensome EU regulations could offer a more business-friendly environment and lower corporate tax rates, and thus become a magnet for foreign investment.
Most provocatively, they questioned predictions that the uncertainty surrounding Brexit would have a profoundly adverse impact on economic performance.
Economists can’t measure uncertainty directly, they reminded us, while proxies, like the frequency with which the term appears in the financial press, do a poor job of capturing its effects.
Indeed, we economists have had little success at reliably predicting when and why uncertainty spikes.
Maybe we would be better off placing less weight on the effects of uncertainty when making forecasts in general, and in the case of Brexit in particular.
But this view looks rather less compelling with the passage of a couple of additional quarters.
British consumer confidence is down, with spending in the second quarter of this year falling to its lowest level in four years.
The BoE forecasts a whopping 20% decline in business investment in the coming years, whereas Brexit’s champions predicted the opposite.
The drop in confidence, some might object, reflects an inconclusive general election and a hung parliament, not the Brexit vote.
Or worsening conditions can be blamed on the government’s less-than-stellar negotiating strategy and the appearance that it is entering discussions with its EU partners unprepared.
But the inconclusive election reflects the schizophrenia of both the Conservative and Labour parties on the Brexit issue.
Prime Minister Theresa May opposed Brexit prior to the referendum, but now embraces it as the occupant of 10 Downing Street.
The Labour opposition under Jeremy Corbyn officially opposes Brexit but seems to derive peculiar satisfaction from the fact that it is proceeding.
Some argue that if the government adopted a more coherent negotiating strategy the damage would be less.
May’s objectives – restriction of immigration from the EU while maintaining full access to the European single market – are fundamentally incompatible.
The only surprise is that it took so long for the consequences to materialize.
It evidently took more time than expected for the implications to sink in – to understand that “Brexit means Brexit,” as May’s pithy tautology put it.
It took time to realize that there would be no smooth break with the EU and that negotiations would not be wrapped up in two years.
There might be no free-trade agreement, no passporting rights for British banks seeking to do business in the EU, and not even an agreement on landing rights for British aircraft on the European continent.
And now the chickens are coming home to roost with a vengeance (if chickens could be vengeful).
Consumers, seeing the pound depreciate, front-loaded their spending in the second half of last year, because they understood that import prices would rise.
Having incurred additional debt, they are now in no position to continue spending at that earlier pace.
Sterling’s substantial depreciation, moreover, augurs a significant rise in inflation, which means that the BoE will have to start raising interest rates sooner rather than later.
What the late, great MIT economist Rudi Dornbusch – that most expert of experts – said about Mexico’s peso crisis in the 1990s applies to the damage from Brexit as well.
A crisis, Dornbusch noted, “takes a much longer time coming than you think, and then it happens much faster than you would have thought.”
NEW YORK – While talking to an Iranian official in Tehran earlier this year, he reminded me of Ayatollah Khomeini’s fondness for comparing the relationship between the United States and Iran to that between a wolf and a lamb.
But the official went on to add his own twist, “Nearly 30 years have passed, and we are not that lamb anymore, and maybe the US is not the same wolf it once was.”
His point was that Iran no longer feels the deep inequality with the US that it did in the past, and that it may be time to try engagement.
Over the past three decades, five American presidents have struggled to figure out what to do about Iran.
As US President-elect Barack Obama and his advisers assess their foreign-policy priorities, they will encounter the immediate challenge of addressing Iran’s nuclear program and the country’s growing strategic importance in the Middle East and South Asia.
They will need quickly to face up to the reality that in order to pursue US interests in the region, including stabilizing Iraq and Afghanistan, the current standoff with Iran cannot continue, and that a greater degree of cooperation is unavoidable.
If they do not want to repeat the failures of past administrations, they will be well advised to do what none of Obama’s predecessors have tried.
They should make a strategic decision to engage Iran – without any pre-conditions – in discussions on a broad range of issues of significance to both sides.
During his candidacy, Obama said of Iran that, “For us not to be in a conversation with them doesn’t make sense.”
Such an approach does not mean having Obama sit down with Iranian Supreme Leader Ali Khamenei or President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad anytime soon.
This can be carried out by a small team, which would hammer out the details of a mutually acceptable framework for a wide-ranging and unconditional dialogue that enables both governments to produce some modest initial successes, and gradually build the confidence and trust required to imagine solutions to larger problems.
At the heart of the American-Iranian conflict is a deep mistrust about each nation’s readiness to tolerate the presence of the other on the world stage.
Each nation feels that it has been humiliated and demonized by the other.
What is needed is a process that rebuilds trust and communication so that the give-and-take of negotiation is perceived as serving mutual interests rather than serving up insults to national dignity or identity.
Although it is far from an exact precedent, the historic 1972 Shanghai Communiqué signed by China and the US, which allowed both governments to “agree to disagree” on many issues while committing themselves to dialogue at the highest levels, offers a promising model.
This far-sighted framework’s effectiveness has been well proven over time.
Dialogue with Iran will inevitably be frustrating and difficult, but it offers the only way to lay out possible grounds for constructive engagement and to devise a strategy for heading off a potentially disastrous confrontation.
Dialogue focused on Iran’s nuclear program or on Iraq alone will not work.
Instead, the full range of issues that are significant to US-Iran relationship must be on the table.
Such an approach will require that each side exercise broad restraint and live with the ambiguity of working with a strong adversary to manage profound differences.
Distrust will continue, signals will be confused, setbacks will be frequent, but the results could well lead over time to greater mutual understanding and a learned capacity to work on some of the most pressing problems, just as the US learned to do with the Soviet Union and China.
Direct diplomatic and strategic engagement between the US and Iran at the highest levels is a proposition yet to be tested.
By pursuing this route after he takes office, Obama will force Iran to make a choice: does it want to be a state that is fully integrated into the global economy, or does it want to be an “ideology” with rogue status?
WASHINGTON, DC – America’s recent bout of dysfunctional politics and the eurozone’s on-again, off-again crisis should, on the face of it, present a golden opportunity to China.
To be sure, the malaise in the United States and Europe is likely to hurt Chinese exports; but, over the long term, China wants to reorient its economy toward domestic consumption.
With the Tea Party wing of America’s Republican Party scaring investors out of the dollar, interest in the Chinese renminbi’s potential as an international reserve currency can only increase.
This will help China to attract more investors seeking to diversify their portfolios.
Chinese government debt will become an important global benchmark asset, which should help its private sector to attract funding on reasonable terms, while the predominance of the US Federal Reserve in determining worldwide monetary conditions would presumably diminish.
The decades-old shift to a multipolar world for manufacturing could thus lead to a more multipolar currency world, with the renminbi as an important player.
But, despite its unique history and current advantages, China harbors a weakness that is quite similar to what has caused so much trouble in the US and Europe: big banks that have an incentive not to be careful.
China’s latest moves suggest that while it may now enjoy some years of greater prominence, its encouragement of its financial institutions to go global is likely to lead to serious trouble.
Ironically, the British government, while no doubt just trying to be hospitable to foreign investors by laying out a red carpet, is helping to set a trap for Chinese financial institutions – and the broader Chinese economy.
By encouraging China to build global financial institutions with light regulation, the United Kingdom is not just inviting irresponsible behavior; it could help to pull an entire economy toward ultimately unproductive and even self-destructive activities.
Credit policies have helped to juice the economy from time to time, but the authorities have also retained the ability to slow things down when warranted.
Banking has become an instrument of economic policy to ensure GDP growth and employment creation, while keeping inflation at an acceptable level.
But the Chinese policy elite are also very taken with the idea that a first-rank country needs a prominent banking system that is active internationally.
There is nothing wrong with this ambition, as long as it is handled with great caution.
Unfortunately, it is now becoming clear that the hard lessons of recent financial crises have been lost on China.
Bankers never like tight regulation – and they particularly do not appreciate being required to fund their operations with more equity relative to debt.
In both good times and bad, their refrain is, “We need lower capital requirements,” meaning they should be allowed to borrow more.
Iceland, Switzerland, and the UK have all learned the hard way that allowing banks to become big relative to their economies brings with it great risks.
Bailouts become more expensive and – as in the case of Iceland – may actually be unaffordable.
Even when, as in the UK, the cost of losses is not completely ruinous, the direct damage to domestic credit and to broader confidence can be enough to hold back the economy for a half-decade or more.
Mervyn King, the former governor of the Bank of England (BoE), is reported to have said, “Banks live globally and die locally.”
In other words, when everything is going well, you may be willing to believe that it does not matter where a particular international bank gets its equity funding and in which jurisdiction its debts are issued.
But when bad things happen and there is pressure on financial markets, with fear of insolvency in the air, it matters a great deal if you have a claim on an insured bank in the United States or on an essentially unregulated offshore subsidiary.
And the British are welcoming an expansion of these activities in London – offering to treat Chinese banks operating there as branches (subject to Chinese regulation) rather than as subsidiaries (subject to British regulation).
Mark Carney, King’s successor at the BoE, said, “We are open for business,” in terms of providing liquidity loans to backstop big banks.
But UK banks’ assets amounted to eight times the country’s GDP before the crisis and will presumably approach that level again with Carney’s encouragement.
Can the BoE – and the UK Treasury – really provide downside insurance for this full amount, or are the UK authorities set on the path to becoming another Iceland (where the value of bank assets peaked at more than 11 times the country’s GDP)?
China is like Cinderella – finally allowed to attend the ball and given a chance to become a prominent player.
But midnight could come very quickly, and financial crises do not have fairytale endings.
BEIJING – At the start of 2017, China announced that it would invest $360 billion in renewable energy by 2020 and scrap plans to build 85 coal-fired power plants.
In March, Chinese authorities reported that the country was already exceeding official targets for energy efficiency, carbon intensity, and the share of clean energy sources.
And just last month, China’s energy regulator, the National Energy Administration, rolled out new measures to reduce the country’s dependence on coal.
These are just the latest indicators that China is at the center of a global energy transformation, which is being driven by technological change and the falling cost of renewables.
It also accounts for a growing share of global energy demand, meaning that its economy’s continuing shift toward service- and consumption-led growth will reshape the resource sector worldwide.
At the same time, various other factors are reducing global resource consumption, including increased energy efficiency in residential, industrial, and commercial buildings, and lower demand for energy in transportation, owing to the proliferation of autonomous vehicles and ride sharing.
According to Beyond the Supercycle: How Technology Is Reshaping Resources, a new report from the McKinsey Global Institute (MGI), these trends are slowing the growth of primary energy demand.
If rapid adoption of new technologies continues, that demand could peak in 2025.
And with less intensive energy use and increased efficiency, energy productivity in the global economy could increase by 40-70% over the next two decades.
While global growth in energy demand is slowing, China’s share of that demand is increasing.
By 2035, China may account for 28% of the world’s primary energy demand, up from 23% today, whereas the United States could account for just 12% by 2035, down from 16% today.
China has already made significant progress in reducing its resource intensity: between 1980 and 2010, its economy grew 18-fold, but its energy consumption grew only fivefold.
According to World Bank data, that reflects a 70% decline in energy intensity per unit of GDP.
In its 13th Five-Year Plan, the Chinese government aims to reduce energy intensity by a total of 15% between 2016 and 2020.
At China's National People’s Congress earlier this year, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang reported that China’s energy intensity fell by 5% last year alone.
Hoping to become a world leader in the field, China is already investing more than $100 billion in domestic renewables every year.
That is twice the level of US investment in domestic renewable energy and more than the combined annual investment of the US and the European Union.
In addition, China is investing $32 billion – more than any other country – in renewables overseas, with top-tier Chinese companies increasingly taking the lead in global renewable-energy value chains.
China’s State Grid Corporation has plans to develop an energy grid that draws on wind turbines and solar panels from around the world.
Chinese solar-panel manufacturers are estimated to have a 20% cost advantage over their US peers, owing to economies of scale and more advanced supply-chain development.
And Chinese wind-turbine manufacturers, having gradually closed technology gaps, now account for more than 90% of the Chinese domestic market, up from just 25% in 2002.
These trends suggest that China will be a major source of both energy demand and cutting-edge technology, implying that it will have a unique opportunity to provide global leadership.
Its experience in reducing energy intensity can serve as a roadmap for developing countries.
And its investments in renewables at home and abroad can lead to additional technological breakthroughs that drive down costs for consumers everywhere.
But China will also face challenges as it moves from fossil fuels to renewables within a changing global resource sector.
Its economy is still highly dependent on coal, implying sizeable costs as it shifts capacity to other resources such as natural gas and renewables.
Moreover, the construction of solar panels and wind farms in China has outpaced upgrades to its electrical grid, creating a great deal of waste.
And Chinese producers, like most others, are feeling increasing pressure to reduce costs and improve efficiency to make up for slower demand growth worldwide.
Despite these hurdles, technological innovation should help Chinese producers realize productivity gains and deliver savings to consumers.
According to MGI, by 2035, changes in the supply and demand for major commodities could result in total cost savings of $900 billion to $1.6 trillion worldwide.
The scale of these savings will depend not only on how quickly new technology is adopted, but also on how policymakers and companies adapt to their new environment.
CAMBRIDGE – Thirty years ago Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher brought about a revolution in thinking and policy in both economics and foreign affairs.
The economies of the United States and Britain are today fundamentally different because of what they did.
The collapse of communism in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union is also the result of their policies.
Of course, Reagan and Thatcher have always had their critics, some of whom now believe that the world economy will revert to pre-Reagan and pre-Thatcher policies.
But anyone who recalls what the American and British economies were like before Reagan and Thatcher, and who knows the changes that they introduced, must also recognize that the world cannot go back.
I had the good fortune to work with President Reagan as his chief economic adviser.
Because of his close relationship with Prime Minister Thatcher, I also had several opportunities to meet with her.
They were revolutionaries in their thinking and in their ability to inspire others to accept fundamental change.
Reagan had four key economic goals when he assumed office in 1981: reduce inflation, reduce high personal tax rates, reduce the size of government, and reduce regulation of the private sector.
Inflation came down rapidly, from more than 10% in 1981 to less than 4% in 1983, because Reagan backed the tough monetary policies of US Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker.
Today an inflation rate of close to zero is the accepted goal of US policy.
Reagan’s tax policies reduced the top income-tax rate from 70% in 1980 to 28% in 1986.
Although the top rate has climbed back to near 40%, no one proposes a return to pre-Reagan levels.
Although Reagan could not bring down spending on entitlement programs for retirees, America’s non-defense discretionary spending was reduced by one-third, from 4.7% of GDP in the 1980 to 3.1% in 1988.
Finally, regulations were reduced in a wide range of industries, including air transport and the financial sector.
While some restrictions on banks will be imposed in the wake of the financial crisis, we will not see a return to severe regulatory constraints on banks’ activities.
Reagan characterized the Soviet Union as an “evil empire” and increased defense spending to challenge Soviet aggression and capabilities.
The collapse of the Soviet Union and of communism were, in part, dramatic responses to US policies and to the inability of the Soviet economy to keep up with the West.
When Margaret Thatcher became prime minister of Britain in 1979, she faced an economy with much more fundamental problems than those in the US.
Britain was a much more socialized economy, with widespread government ownership and dominant trade unions.
She privatized the major government-owned industries and sold government-owned housing to tenants.
No one is proposing to renationalize industries or to take back that housing.
The top tax rate on wage income was cut in half during her tenure as prime minister, falling from over 80% when she took office to 40%.
Additional taxes on investment income meant the top tax rate before Thatcher came to power was initially above 95%.
Although the top rate of income tax in Britain was recently raised to 50%, there is no thought of going back to pre-Thatcher taxes.
Faced with high inflation, Thatcher backed a monetarist approach that supported high interest rates and succeeded in sharply reducing inflation.
Thatcher supported Britain’s entry into the European Union in order to benefit from free trade, but she forcefully opposed joining the single currency.
The Labour government that followed her continued the policy of remaining outside the euro zone, as will the Conservatives, who are likely to return to power under David Cameron in the spring of 2010.
Some of those regulatory changes may be reversed, but Britain is unlikely to jeopardize an important component of its economy by returning to pre-Thatcher financial rules.
Both Tony Blair and Gordon Brown, who headed Labour governments after almost two decades of Conservative rule, have been the face of market-friendly “New Labour,” and it is now the only face that the Labour Party has.
But the dramatic policy changes in the US and Britain under Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher brought about such profound improvements that there is no going back.
BEIJING – Since beginning its reform and opening up 40 years ago this month, China has been a very good student.
And now, after four decades of rapid development, the country is increasingly presenting itself as a teacher.
As it commits more capital abroad, it has a strong interest in how countries where it invests are run.
In recent years, China has been using its more assertive “going out” policy – most ambitiously expressed in its massive Belt and Road Initiative – both to advance its own economic self-interest and to project soft power.
China’s leaders want to restore their country to what they view as its rightful position in the world.
China’s economic weight reached its peak in 1600, when it accounted for more than one-third of the global economy.
Its share of global GDP declined slowly until 1820, when it began to drop precipitously, owing to the Industrial Revolution’s enormous impact on economic growth in the West.
By the early 1960s, China’s share of global GDP had fallen below 5%.
Then Deng Xiaoping initiated China’s reform and opening up, and the country’s own growth miracle began.
Since 1978, China has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty, and its share of global GDP economy, now at one-fifth, continues to rise.
If China wants to increase its international influence by holding up its experience as a model for others to emulate, it must identify the mechanisms that underlay its success and explain why they are transferrable.
This is essentially the mandate of a new center launched by Tsinghua University in Beijing.
The Academic Center for Chinese Economic Practices and Thinking, with its suggestive acronym ACCEPT, is dedicated to understanding and disseminating China’s development experience.
Earlier this month, it initiated this process with its first report, called “Economic Lessons Learned from China’s 40 Years of Reform and Opening Up.”
For starters, growth over the last four decades was spurred mainly by the entry of new firms, rather than the restructuring of old ones.
Moreover, the distribution of rents from the conversion of agricultural land to industrial and residential use played a vital role in encouraging investment.
At the same time, financial deepening was essential to spur entrepreneurial activity and consumption.
Opening up also encouraged learning, and, finally, proactive macroeconomic policy enabled the country to avoid financial crises and smooth out fluctuations in growth.
One key question raised by the report – and, indeed, by virtually any analysis of China’s development experience since 1978 – concerns the relative roles of the state and the market.
Was the emergence of new private firms or the helping hand of the government more important to China’s success?
But, as Harvard economist Dani Rodrik pointed outat the launch event, the way someone answers it tends to say more about them than about the Chinese economy.
China, Rodrik believes, is like a Rorschach test for economists.
Yet the ACCEPT report may provide useful insight into the question, by highlighting how state management and economic liberalization interact.
New private enterprises were key drivers of economic growth, but it was the state that created strong incentives for market entry.
Entrepreneurs invested heavily in their relationships with government authorities, and the state used market signals to guide resource allocation and evaluate experimental initiatives.
Beyond encouraging the entry of new firms, the Chinese state mobilized considerable domestic resources for investment.
Even more impressive, the state ensured constant experimentation and learning at all levels of government, which will remain essential as China addresses issues like inequality.
Yet explaining the main factors driving China’s development is just the first step.
If China is to export its development model in a meaningful way, it will need to overcome a number of additional barriers – beginning with growing international mistrust.
Among developed countries, a major complaint is that China has been free riding on others’ innovations, including by requiring foreign companies to share their technology with Chinese firms as a condition of market access.
Though it is entirely normal for a country at China’s stage of economic development to absorb and imitate foreign technologies, its size and market power dramatically increase its capacity to encourage technology transfer.
And China has been happy to use that leverage, often in ways that its competitors consider unfair.
But, with many of those investments bringing low economic returns, China can no longer afford to ignore how its resources are used or the indebtedness of its loan recipients.
In persuading other countries to accept its development lessons, China faces a difficult dilemma.
After all, China owes its development success in part to the fact that it retained full ownership and control of the process.
By contrast, countries in Central and Eastern Europe had development policies thrust upon them by the European Union – a dynamic that has contributed significantly to the rise of anti-establishment political forces.
At a time of growing resentment toward its increasing international influence, China’s ability to promote its development model is being severely undermined.
It does not help that the West remains adamant that a non-democratic approach should not be allowed to succeed globally.
We are heading for a dangerous clash, not of civilizations, but of systems.
It makes little sense for developing countries to reject outright the lessons of China’s economic miracle, and deepening hostility between China and the West is in nobody’s interest.
Instead, countries should be open to learning from China, which in turn should recognize the limits of its political model, even compared to the flawed democracies of the West.
WASHINGTON, DC – In response to the wave of fake news that inundated the recent presidential election campaign in the United States, much attention has been devoted to those who produce or spread those stories.
The assumption is that if news outlets were to report only the “facts,” readers and viewers would always reach the right conclusion about a given story.
Yes, we need news organizations to deliver reliable information; but we also need those receiving it to be savvy consumers.
For decades, the US government has supported programs to foster independent media in authoritarian, resource-deprived, or dysfunctional countries.
But these programs tacitly assume that the US itself is immune to the problems people in other countries encounter when they create or consume information.
We in the US also assume that American media, sustained by advertising, will continue to thrive; that independent journalism is the norm; and that most people are capable of thinking critically and making sound judgments about the information they receive.
In fact, some of the lessons that we have learned while supporting vibrant information gathering and distribution abroad are equally relevant to the US.
In the 2016 election, the personal beliefs that drove millions of voters’ decisions were based not only on each person’s experiences and the information they accessed, but also on how they processed those experiences and that information.
Voters’ own relationships with content producers, their motivation to believe or disbelieve facts, and their critical thinking skills all determined how they interpreted and acted on information.
In the election, most mainstream pundits did not seem to “get” millions of Americans’ beliefs or viewpoints, so it is little wonder that those millions of Americans were turned off by the pundits’ incessant chatter.
To these voters, the pundits were simply information peddlers with no attachments to the issues that matter.
Men and women talking in front of TV cameras are too far removed from the factories, offices, bars, churches, schools, and hospitals where viewers form the relationships that determine how they process information.
The so-called digital revolution did not render superfluous the importance of human connection in shaping people’s interpretation and response to the information they receive.
Relationships are built on trust, which is essential for ensuring that consumers accept information that challenges their closely held beliefs.
But, according to Gallup, only 32% of Americans have a “great deal” or “fair amount” of trust in traditional media outlets – an all-time low.
That is deeply problematic, and it suggests that many citizens are throwing out the good information with the bad.
As with any other good, how information is consumed reflects economic and political opportunities, personal incentives, and institutional or cultural norms.
Workers in Ohio whose wages have stagnated, or unemployed voters in Michigan whose jobs have migrated overseas, will consume information in a way that reflects their economic situation.
Not surprisingly, they will often select sources – whether credible or not – that are critical of globalization and current fiscal and economic policies.
An ample supply of sound information is not sufficient to make good choices; news consumers need critical-thinking skills.
Information is much like the food we eat: we need to understand its ingredients, and where and how it is produced, and the effects of overconsumption.
It will probably take decades to rebuild trusting relationships between consumers and mainstream news media.
Information consumers will always have biases and incentives to select one piece of information over another.
Even so, we can improve critical-thinking skills so that citizens know how to pick trustworthy sources, and resist their own biases.
Cultivating critical-thinking skills takes time and practice, which is why it is more important than ever to invest in education.
Some of the models that have been used abroad may work in the US, too.
For example, in Ukraine, a recent initiative carried out by IREX mobilized librarians in an effort to neutralize the detrimental effects of Kremlin-funded propaganda.
Fifteen thousand Ukrainians were taught concrete skills in avoiding emotional manipulation, verifying sources and credentials, detecting paid content and hate speech, and debunking fake videos and photos.
The results were impressive: participants improved their ability to distinguish trustworthy news from false news by 24%.
Better yet, they then trained hundreds more people to detect disinformation, thus multiplying the initiative’s overall impact.
With a rather modest investment, we can make teaching these skills a standard practice in school curricula.
Philanthropists can also create or support grassroots organizations that work with citizens to strengthen their ability to consume information critically.
SALZBURG – As war loomed over Kosovo ten years ago, Germany’s then foreign minister, Joschka Fischer, explained that the principle that had always governed his involvement in politics was: “Never again war; never again Auschwitz!”
Ethnic cleansing and violence in Kosovo, however, soon made it clear to him that there were moments when one had to choose between those two imperatives: a new Auschwitz sometimes could be prevented only by means of war.
The idea of a “just war,” legitimized by a justa causa (just cause), though scorned for many years, is thus back in vogue.
The notion used to be frowned upon because any warring party tends to view its own cause as just.
Moreover, in the absence of an impartial judge, a winner can always impose his “truth” upon the vanquished, as happened with the Treaty of Versailles after World War I.
While “just wars” seem to be back, international law has also come to condemn waging aggressive (“unjust”) war as a punishable crime, with the consequence that every warring party now declares its wars to be a defense against foreign attack, much as Hitler did in 1939.
(Indeed, all war ministries have become “defense ministries,” leaving one to wonder against whom a country must be defended if there are no longer any attackers.)
But in this matter as well, the winner gets to judge who was the aggressor, so it is fortunate that Hitler did not prevail.
Of course, military intervention for purposes beyond defending one’s country remains possible, but requires a UN Security Council resolution.
The latter alone, provided no permanent member of the Security Council disagrees, can decide whether a war is legitimized by a “just cause” (nowadays generally a gross breach of human rights).
The Security Council’s permanent members thus remain legibus soluti , i.e., sovereign in the seventeenth-century sense of the word, meaning “able to do evil with impunity.”
Behind this is the notion that respect for human rights can be enforced externally, together with the hope that rulers will behave better because they recognize that they may be held accountable for violating human rights.
In the meantime, the return to the idea of a “just cause” carries big risks, especially evident when, as happened in Georgia, a great power claims the mantle of a protector of the rights of its nationals in a neighboring country.
If this idea stands, Russian minorities from the Baltic to the Crimea may turn out to be ticking time bombs.
The idea of the “moral indifference” of the law of war is based on the recognition that wars will not be eliminated, and that they should instead be limited and their horrors mitigated by universally applicable rules of conduct.
Precisely because it is less ambitious than the principle of “just war,” moral indifference has been tremendously successful in mitigating war’s horrors by banning some particularly inhuman types of weapons, forcing armies to protect civilians and accord humane treatment to prisoners of war, banning annexations, etc.
The pacifist Leo Tolstoy, in his novel War and Peace , regarded this pruning and tending of war as cynical.
On the other hand, Tolstoy justified the unrestrained and unregulated eruption of public anger and the furious slaying of retreating French soldiers by Russian peasants.
Pacifists want to understand war as a lawless condition that should be abolished.
But those who recognize that humanity won’t succeed in stopping war seek, instead, to contain and “humanize” it.
The medieval Popes practiced this wisdom when they limited permissible wars to certain times of year.
But any “last stand” type of warfare refuses to recognize the possibility of a future war for which it may be a precedent.
So the object of international law is not to ban “unjust” wars and permit “just” ones, but to assure that wars are waged for limited aims, so that they don’t rage out of control.
The language of justice and injustice, and demands of unconditional surrender and criminal retribution for the vanquished only promote – indeed, provoke – total war.
The flip side of the criminalization of “aggressive” war is the fact that peace is also no longer a reliable legal state that can be ended only by a formal declaration of war.
When state leaders decide to bomb a city like Belgrade without any formal end to peace, they are not engaging in war, but in a form of state terrorism.
Terrorism will prevail if its mentality infects the civilized world, and if state leaders resort to terror to fight terror.
Fighting terrorism is not a war, because terrorism itself is not a warring party, but a means to an end.
Terrorists, when caught, are subject to criminal sanctions and punishment under the law.
Countries unwilling or unable to prevent terrorist violence emanating from their territory forfeit their right to territorial integrity, and others can declare war on them to pursue the problem at its root.
But those who adhere to the motto “Terror can only be countered with terror” should remember who coined that phrase: Adolf Hitler.
NORTHAMPTON, MASSACHUSETTS – Whom would you trust more, Russian President Vladimir Putin or Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel?
Whereas Putin is reveling in the attention that Russia is receiving as host of the 2018 World Cup, Emanuel has informed the US Soccer Federation and FIFA that Chicago has no interest in serving as a host city when the event comes to North America in 2026.
Canada and Mexico will each host ten matches, and the United States will host another 60.
To understand what it means to host a global sporting event, consider the fact that Putin’s government spent $51-70 billion to stage the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, and is projected to spend at least $14 billion hosting the current World Cup, which runs through July 15.
Russia’s budget provided for the construction of seven new stadiums – including one in St. Petersburg that cost around $1.7 billion – and renovations to five other venues.
And that does not even account for the additional expenses for training facilities, lodging, expanded infrastructure, and security.
Chicago, having already hosted the opening ceremony and first match of the 1994 World Cup, has adopted quite a different mindset.
Emanuel’s spokesperson, Matt McGrath, recently issued a statement explaining that, “FIFA could not provide a basic level of certainty on some major unknowns that put our city and taxpayers at risk.”
FIFA, McGrath alleges, was demanding something tantamount to a “blank check,” including an “open-ended ability to modify the agreement … at any time and at their discretion.”
Moreover, FIFA would have required that Soldier Field – home to the Chicago Bears football team – be taken out of use for two months prior to the tournament.
In the end, Emanuel’s office concluded that, “The uncertainty for taxpayers, coupled with FIFA’s inflexibility and unwillingness to negotiate, were clear indications that further pursuit of the bid wasn’t in Chicago’s best interests.”
In addition to holding anywhere from two to six games – potentially over the course of a number of weeks – World Cup host cities are expected to throw a “fan fest,” furnish training facilities for the teams, and provide extensive tax exemptions for a range of activities.
In fact, FIFA prohibits both direct and indirect taxation on all income from the event, exempting continental soccer confederations, host-country broadcasters, and FIFA member associations, service providers, and contractors.
It is little wonder, then, that Minneapolis and Vancouver have joined Chicago in declining the hosting honor.
To justify its imperious behavior, FIFA points out that, “[the] World Cup is a major sporting event that attracts global attention to the Host Country/Host Countries and provides the opportunity for significant financial investment in sporting and public infrastructure.”
And that added attention and investment, FIFA claims, “may contribute to significant mid- and long-term socioeconomic benefits … as well as economic growth.”
FIFA only goes so far as to promise an “opportunity for significant financial investment” in infrastructure, as well as attention and investment that “may contribute” to growth.
In reality, scholarly evidence shows that the World Cup rarely benefits host countries and cities as much as FIFA would like the public, and public officials, to think.
For example, consider what Russia gets in exchange for its $14 billion-plus investment in this year’s event.
While all of the revenue from ticket sales, international broadcasting rights, and sponsorships will go directly to FIFA, Russia will be left with seven new stadiums and five refurbished facilities that it does not need.
And unless it demolishes these venues, it will have to spend tens of millions of dollars every year to maintain them.
Meanwhile, hundreds of acres of scarce urban real estate will have been forfeited as sites for white elephants.
Apparently, there was no hiding the 6,000 empty seats at the Uruguay-Egypt match on June 15.
If history is any guide, it is highly unlikely that the 2018 World Cup will increase Russia’s international investment or trade, boost its tourism industry, or strengthen its people’s commitment to physical fitness.
What it will do is instill a fleeting sense of national pride among a significant portion of Russians, while offering an ephemeral distraction from the country’s mounting problems.
With or without the World Cup, oil-price volatility and international sanctions imposed in response to Putin’s 2014 annexation of Crimea will continue to darken Russia’s economic prospects and diminish ordinary Russians’ standard of living.
WARSAW – Earlier this year, a group led by former US Secretary of State Madeleine Albright (which included me) issued a report on a new strategic concept called “NATO 2020.”
The report recommended that NATO open its door to new members while seeking a more constructive relationship with Russia.
We outlined a dual strategy of reassuring the NATO allies that their interests would be defended while engaging with the Kremlin in a manner consistent with the 1997 NATO-Russia Founding Act and the 2002 Rome Declaration on the NATO-Russia relationship.
Reassuring alliance governments does not require only that “any constructive engagement would have to be based on military reassurances within NATO,” as prominent experts like Wolfgang Ischinger and Ulrich Weisser have said.
Security assurances should also comprise confidence-building measures, along with conventional and nuclear arms control and disarmament.
The Albright report outlined a strategy of “re-engagement and reassurance.”
The “reset” of relations with Russia can succeed only if it is reciprocal.
Russia, therefore, should apply two fundamental principles that it has already accepted in several declarations.
First, as the Helsinki Final Act put it, every sovereign nation has an inherent right “to belong or not to belong to international organizations, to be or not to be a party to bilateral or multilateral treaties, including the right to be or not to be a party to treaties of alliance; they also have the right to neutrality.”
Second, the sovereign equality of states includes respect for all the rights inherent in sovereignty.
NATO needs Russia, and Russia needs NATO, and the US shift away from unilateralism has restored the importance of multilateral security institutions while giving NATO the chance to establish new partnerships with the EU and Russia.
Back in February, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton told the alliance’s Strategic Concept seminar in Washington that, “while Russia faces challenges to its security, NATO is not among them.
We want a cooperative NATO-Russia relationship that produces concrete results and draws NATO and Russia closer together.”
Visiting Moscow that month, our NATO expert group sought to promote a re-thinking of mutual perceptions.
The main problem in the NATO-Russia relationship is not a lack of institutions, documents, or procedures, but a lack of transparency, confidence, and mutual trust.
American security analyst Charles Kupchan raised a pertinent question when he asked whether Russia should eventually join the Atlantic alliance, pointing out that the settlements concluded after the Napoleonic wars and World War II show that alliances between former adversaries can be critical to the consolidation of great-power peace.
In other words, NATO’s strategy towards Russia must be guided by a spirit of inclusiveness.
But such a strategy requires that Russia clearly demonstrate its political will to cooperate with NATO.
The military doctrine that it unveiled in February this year lists both internal and external threats, but its primary emphasis was on portraying the US and NATO as a danger.
Whether the doctrine’s authors really believe that NATO poses a threat to Russia is not clear, as the country has not had such peaceable neighbors on its Western borders for more than 300 years.
Russia and NATO must jointly develop a new security agenda and a more cooperative methodology based on common working groups and joint papers.
The old way of negotiating – via proposals and counterproposals, with Russia and NATO perceiving each other as adversaries – should be abandoned.
The kind of approach that we need is exemplified by the work of the Euro-Atlantic Security Initiative, co-chaired by Sam Nunn of the US, Igor Ivanov of Russia, and Germany’s Ischinger.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel recently urged that all parties involved focus more on practical steps.
That means that we must think about how to broaden the application of our commitments to reciprocal transparency to all military forces in Europe – including conventional and nuclear forces and missile-defense installations.
The time is ripe to explore again limitations on conventional forces, and to adjust them to current rather than past needs.
We must also redefine common threats, while strengthening the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s mechanisms for preventing, managing, and resolving conflicts.
And the common security agenda of confidence-building and transparency must be based on the indivisibility of security in Europe and the transatlantic area as a whole, including respect for sovereignty and territorial integrity – not just for alliance members, but for all countries that belong to the broader transatlantic security community.
The interdependence of all states – large or small, weak or powerful, democratic or authoritarian – has become the organizing principle of today’s international security system.
But interdependence does not in itself ensure control of the way relations develop between states, much less developments within them.
The tasks confronting NATO require redefining the essence of transatlantic relations in order to answer some fundamental questions.
It endorses policies that capture accurately the relationship between “out of area operations” and members’ commitment to their mutual self-defense under Article 5 of the North Atlantic Treaty.
It further rightly suggests that NATO’s strategic political and military objectives could be achieved jointly with Russia through greater stability, mutual transparency, predictability, and arms reduction verified by non-proliferation and arms control agreements.
The revived importance of multilateral security institutions is creating a new climate and new prospects for a security system that can meet the needs of the twenty-first century.
The coming NATO and OSCE summits in Lisbon and Astana offer a unique opportunity to move the Euro-Atlantic alliance and Russia towards an inclusive, cooperative, and effective security community.
HONG KONG – Joseph Yam, the head of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority (HKMA) and a career civil servant, is retiring.
Ordinarily, that should not be a newsworthy event, yet it is, and for good reasons.
Donald Tsang, Chief Executive of Hong Kong’s government, has the opportunity to restore integrity and proper governance in one of the most important statutory bodies in the territory by choosing a person solely on the basis of unimpeachable honesty and competence.
Yam remains a hero to many in Hong Kong, including journalists unschooled in international finance.
To them, he is the guardian of the Hong Kong dollar, which has been fixed at 7.8 to the US dollar for 26 years.
During the 1998 financial crisis, devaluation would have hurt those who owned local real estate but had little earnings or assets in US dollars.
Not surprisingly, Hong Kong’s oligopoly of property tycoons opposed changing the peg despite the currency’s gross overvalue at the time.
The 7.8 exchange rate was maintained at the cost – borne by all citizens – of six years of economic stagnation.
The currency was in theory governed by a rules-based Currency Board, which the British invented for their smaller colonies.
It tied the local currency to the British Pound, giving local authorities no discretion in monetary policy.
Freedom in money creation or in interest-rate policy could mean economic disaster – as, indeed, it did in many ex-colonies following independence.
Yam was always frustrated by the lack of policy freedom under the Currency Board.
Before the crisis struck in 1998 he put in place measures giving him room to manipulate liquidity and interest rates.
His deviation from the system also created loopholes that he did not know about or thought irrelevant.
When, during the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis, global investment professionals turned their attention from Thailand and Korea to Hong Kong, they quickly spotted structural weaknesses in the way the currency was managed.
Local experts had previously warned Yam about this, but he dismissed their argument in a way that one economist who was present at a meeting with him described as “demeaning and contemptuous”.
Moreover, they left in shock in realizing Yam, and the financial secretary, Donald Tsang, nominally his boss but without real power, didn’t really understand the experts’ economic reasoning.
Hong Kong ’s government, led by the HKMA, launched an unprecedented intervention, buying up local shares to “defeat” the speculators, but failed to stop the stampede by global investors, including conservative pension and mutual funds.
Finally, with the government about to exhaust its entire foreign reserves, Yam realized that he had to change course.
He wisely accepted his critics’ suggestions, fixing the problems that he had denied existed.
He was awarded the highest public-service medal by the then Hong Kong Chief Executive Tung Chi-wah, who was later ousted by Beijing for incompetence.
At this writing, Yam is widely criticized in Hong Kong for failing to protect small investors against the dishonest sales tactics of a number of banks in their selling of toxic Lehman Brothers derivatives disguised as bonds.
He denies any responsibility, even though the HKMA oversees all financial institutions.
Yam is the highest-paid civil servant in the world, earning US$1.5 million last year.
His salary is seven times that of the chairman of the US Federal Reserve and nearly 3 times higher than that of his own superior, the Hong Kong Chief Executive.
He claims that he should be rewarded as a fund manager supervising a multibillion-dollar fund in the private sector.
But, whereas private-sector professionals are fired or have their salaries reduced for poor performance, Yam wanted private-sector pay with none of the downside risk.
The HKMA’s Compensation Committee had the sole responsibility for setting Yam’s salary.
But, during his 16-year tenure, Yam put his own appointees on that committee, choosing them from the financial sector that he regulates.
Yam’s retirement presents an opportunity for Hong Kong’s government to redress a major issue of governance.
It should replace the compensation structure by the same civil-service scale applied to the government of which the HKMA is an integral part.
Hong Kong ’s civil servants are already the best paid in the world.
Anyone seeking to compare a public-service job with the private sector in negotiating an employment contract should simply seek work in the private sector rather than for the public good.
There is much speculation that Hong Kong Chief Executive Donald Tsang is about to appoint a generalist civil servant better known for his personal loyalty than for his financial expertise.
Nor is there any sign that the entire HKMA pay scale should be scrapped.
Either outcome would mean that the Chief Executive has missed an opportunity to send the right signal that Hong Kong stands for good public governance rather than cronyism.
LONDON – The economic situation in the countries of the so-called Arab Awakenings is deteriorating quickly.
Egypt is running low on cash – before recent rescue loans, currency reserves covered less than three months of imports – and Egyptians are hoarding fuel and foodstuffs in anticipation of future shortages.
More frequent and longer-lasting power outages foretell worse to come in an economy already struggling with mass unemployment, widespread exclusion, and deep pockets of poverty.
Short-term macroeconomic stability is the immediate priority in Egypt and the other Arab Awakening countries.
In the medium term, however, the viability of the current order is at stake – and not only in these countries, but across the rest of North Africa and the Middle East.
With so much at stake, Majid Jafar of UAE-based Crescent Petroleum was right to worry at the recent World Economic Forum on the Middle East and North Africa at the Dead Sea.
His proposal of an Arab Stabilization Plan, inspired by the post-1945 Marshall Plan in Western Europe, is laudable.
The Marshall Plan was a macroeconomic strategy involving massive capital transfers to help reconstruct the war-ravaged industrial capacity and infrastructure of economies with well-developed institutions.
But what the Arab region needs are micro-oriented, project-based, and governance-heavy investments conditioned on deep reform of a business environment that is generally considered among the worst in the world.
In a joint report on the competitiveness of the Arab countries, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and the World Economic Forum call for urgent institutional reform to support private-sector growth.
Excessive red tape and ineffective enforcement of competition policy and governance rules are hampering entrepreneurship throughout the region.
Massive investments are also needed in education to eradicate deep pockets of illiteracy, raise overall skill levels, and better match skills to the demands of the market.
Perhaps surprisingly, there is widespread consensus in the Arab Awakening countries that the private sector is central to sustained job creation and growth.
We saw this recently when the EBRD, together with the British-based organization Forward Thinking, conducted a closed-door workshop for 27 leading representatives of parties from across the political spectrum in the region.
Two days of intensive discussions revealed important differences in perspective, but also many commonalities.
The parties on the right largely embrace free-market thinking, while Egypt’s Muslim Brotherhood and its kindred parties in Libya and Tunisia are deeply sceptical of the state, which they view as bloated, inept, and ultimately corrupt.
Moreover, the existing banks have failed to serve these parties’ small-business and farming constituencies.
Achieving ambitious goals for inclusive growth and job creation quickly without an enabling state and without using the banking system will be extremely difficult.
Without question, the main responsibility for building these countries’ political systems and reforming their economies rests with their citizens.
But the region can look to the successful transition in Central Europe and the powerful anchor for reforms provided by these countries’ accession to the European Union.
Countries like Hungary and Poland can hardly be accused of having a hidden agenda when they share their development experience.
Much can also be learned from countries like Turkey, which has managed to create a dynamic and innovative private sector.
The good news is that the economies of the Arab Awakening countries do not suffer from the deep distortions that characterized post-communist Europe.
Many of the early reforms have already been implemented, and reasonably sophisticated banking systems are in place.
In post-communist Europe, banks had to be built from scratch out of the rubble of socialism.
As a result, while political uncertainty will take its toll on economic growth, the Arab Awakening countries should not have to face a transitional recession, as post-communist Europe did in the 1990’s.
On the other hand, they are unlikely to benefit from the subsequent robust growth that most European transition countries experienced.
Jafar is right that the Arab Awakening countries need a plan.
But it should be a plan for private-sector-led inclusive growth, supported by efforts in the rest of the Arab world and in the EU.
Most critically, it must be a plan owned by the countries themselves and based on an approach that recognizes the critical roles of an enabling state and a catalytic financial sector.
The ongoing socio-political transition, underpinned by widespread public recognition of the need for change, provides a historic opportunity to embark on growth-enhancing reforms.
It can also be a driver of development and poverty reduction all over the world.
At the COP 23 Climate Conference in Bonn, Germany, in November, multilateral development institutions showed themselves to be more committed than ever to the urgent and central issue of supporting and financing these critical goals.
Partnership around the world must be maintained in the global effort to achieve a smooth transition to low carbon and climate-smart development.
Climate-smart development also makes good economic and business sense, particularly when it comes to sustainable infrastructure.
We have already witnessed tremendous growth in renewable energy, creating with it new business opportunities and jobs.
As multilateral development institutions, we reconfirm our commitment to the Paris climate agreement.
Our role is to facilitate the public and private finance that is a vital part of the climate solution.
That is why, two years after the Paris accord was successfully negotiated, we are increasingly aligning actions and resources in support of developing countries’ goals.
In July, the G20 Sustainability Action Plan embedded the Paris agreement in G20 policies and noted that more effective use of financing from multilateral development institutions is key to innovation and private investment in climate action.
In 2016 alone, multilateral development institutions committed over $27 billion in climate finance, and we continue to step up our work, determined to broaden the private and public finance mobilized for climate action at COP 23.
Each of these measures supports our strong commitment to the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals.
By pursuing them, climate action will become a key part of the international community’s work to place infrastructure and the rollout of new technologies and policies for energy, water, and mobility at the core of sustainable development.
Climate change poses a grave threat to the natural environment, to economic growth, and to the lives of all people around the world, especially the poorest and most vulnerable.
It is fitting that this threat to national economies and to every person on earth, and the opportunity to counter it, should be tackled with the backing of multilateral development institutions.
We call on others to join us in placing climate action at the center of their business, stepping up climate finance, and tracking its impact around the world.
The 2003 World Press Freedom report put out by the group Reporters without Borders ranks China 161st among 166 nations, somewhere between Iran and North Korea.
But Chinese television fare, at least, no longer consists of the prudish melodramas and clumsy indoctrination programs of the Maoist past.
Casual observers of today's freewheeling offerings of sex, crime, drugs, violence, and banal game shows on Chinese TV might come away with the impression that most of the shackles have been removed from televised content.
Viewpoints that deviate in the slightest from Party doctrine are still absent from Chinese TV.
Despite the surface diversity of programming, the monolithic control of political discourse has changed little since the 1950's.
China Central Television (CCTV) alone has 12 channels (many broadcasting 24 hours a day), and employs about 3,000 people.
CCTV falls under the control of the Propaganda Department and the Ministry of Radio, Film, and Television.
Numerous provincial and municipal TV stations are also required to carry some CCTV programming.
Given the staggering amount of programming needed to fill the time slots, content monitoring must be implemented with maximum efficiency.
Censorship has been made easier, not more difficult, by the government's decision in the 1990's to shift to a free-market strategy for entertainment products.
Big subsidies to TV stations were mostly discontinued, and the new "sink or swim" approach forced TV outlets to compete for advertising revenues, resulting in programming with greater mass appeal.
Thus, in a strategy mirrored elsewhere in the cultural sphere, the government simply relinquished much control over the moral component of TV content.
The anti-pornography saohuang campaigns carried out in the 1980's and early 1990's are a thing of the past.
Perhaps realizing that an entertained and distracted populace is less likely to complain about public policy, the Party has allowed entertainment programming to follow the Western model, lessening the need for micro-managed censorship.
This conveniently allows the authorities to control news programming with an iron hand while relegating the bulk of programming to a looser and less labor-intensive monitoring system.
Of course, given China's highly politicized atmosphere, politics can leak into even the most innocuous areas of discourse, and the many talk shows and audience participation formats necessitate a less intrusive but nonetheless effective system of content regulation.
The first surprise I encountered while working for CCTV as a program planner was how minimal this system is.
Party officials don't hover over each step of the process, and virtually no cutting of completed products is carried out on Party orders.
On the surface, writers, directors, and performers seem free to plan and produce their shows with little or no supervision or monitoring.
The department heads and oversight committees that meet to evaluate programming seldom dictate content, but merely pass their complaints and recommendations down to programming heads.
The top-down hierarchy is autocratic and arbitrary; lower levels have little collaborative input and no right of appeal.
In my experience, 99% of all censorship occurs with the writers and producers themselves.
Sporadic complaints and warnings from above enable them to develop an intuitive sense for the boundaries of acceptable content, so they create shows that are free from offending material from the outset.
The lack of explicit guidelines also keeps content more conservative than it need be, because producers tend to err on the safe side.
Vague but pervasive intimidation is the main factor keeping TV personnel in line.
But another force serves the Party's interests as well: the deep-seated Chinese cultural inertia that stresses collectivist, group-oriented behavior.
In such an atmosphere, inclusion of politically incorrect content is not merely a risky move, but constitutes a breach of social decorum.
Indeed, working daily with Chinese TV creators, I noticed a subtle, almost instinctive tendency to avoid any content or format that is unusual, novel, or unorthodox, never mind subversive.
The exceptions to this state of affairs are when the Party initiates a propaganda campaign, such as the one associated with the turnover of Hong Kong in 1997, or the more recent anti-Falun Gong blitzkrieg.
At such times, directives are issued to produce programming with specific ideological content, and such shows - dubbed renwu (duties) - are perfunctorily overseen by TV producers, after which the more bottom-up mode returns.
Many TV producers have internalized these controls so well that they are an unconscious fact of life, and audiences now entertained by endless costume dramas and soap operas are not clamoring for freer political content.
Barring some catastrophic change, this method of information control can be expected to continue well into the 21st century.
When overseeing military exercises from aboard a nuclear submarine near Scandinavia, Vladimir Putin announced that Russia had developed a new missile system, the finest in the world.
Three older missiles, launched in his presence, failed to reach their targets on Kamchatka.
The submarine that Putin was on resembled the Kursk, which exploded during a similar military exercise in 2000, killing 118 sailors.
In a recent joke, an interviewer asks Putin what happened to his favorite dog's puppies, whose birth he proudly announced during last December's parliamentary elections.
Russian democracy is almost as young and blind as Putin's puppies - but much poorer.
Low-income countries can develop democracy, but they have a tough time maintaining it.
India, which is both poor and democratic, is a happy exception to this rule.
Countries with per capita incomes close to the current Russian level sustain democracy for 15-20 years on average.
Putin's first term in office proved to be an economic success and a political failure.
High oil prices kept Russia's economy - and common people's income ­- growing rapidly.
(Europeans need not be envious: growth is quicker when it begins low; think again about puppies.)
Russia is a rich country with a poor population, and redistribution schemes work well in such conditions.
Putin promises to double Russia's GDP by 2010 - an ambitious aim, and success would improve democracy's prospects.
Practically everything that a Russian citizen can find in a supermarket, including the supermarket itself, is produced or imported by private firms.
In the late 1980's, Mikhail Gorbachev announced that Russian oil was practically exhausted.
Now Putin claims credit for making Russia the world's leading producer, ahead of Saudi Arabia.
The hydrocarbons sector secures Russian growth, undermines the power of Arab producers and OPEC, and thus promises a decrease in oil prices.
The problem for Putin is that this success was achieved not by the Russian state, but by private enterprises.
By creating independent courts, securing property rights, and collecting fair taxes, the state is crucial for making the environment favorable for business.
But to attribute the performance of Russian business to the efforts of the state is the same as attributing a writer's work to his editor, or even to his censor.
Many Russian industrialists, such as the founders of Yukos Oil, oversaw their businesses' stunning growth.
Now some of them are in jail, in exile, or frightened out of the industry.
In the meantime, economic growth, which is vital for an impoverished but ambitious population, was the central issue of the presidential campaign.
You cannot deceive people about growth; they feel the weight of their pockets better than anyone else.
But you can manipulate their understanding of it: who are the authors of growth, the Khodorkovskys or the Putins?
Growth, it seems, is attributed here not to those who produce it, but to those who punish it.
Trained as lawyers or even as philologists, but with their formative experience in the security services, these people introduced a concept they call "political technology."
These "technologies" range from producing decoy political parties and legally persecuting opponents to publishing fake polls and falsifying elections.
Of course, electorates have been cheated, bribed, and blackmailed for as long as there have been elections.
What is fairly new, at least for Russians, is that these "technologies" are efficiently coordinated from the top of the presidential administration.
The most successful recent example was the invention of the political party "Motherland," which took protest votes away from the liberal parties as well as from the Communists.
Created by the presidential administration two months before the December parliamentary elections, "Motherland" split and practically collapsed two months after its amazing victory.
Russian political experts, pollsters, and consultants ascribe every success or failure in Russian politics to "political technologies."
Their profession has become so important in recent years that there is now a special "Day of the Political Consultant" in Russia every February 25.
This year's day saw Putin sack the then Prime Minister, Mikhail Kasyanov - an architect of Russia's pro-business reforms - as if to celebrate the overriding power of "political technology."
This manner of governance bodes well neither for economic growth nor democracy in the long term.
NEW DELHI/MANILA – In Southeast Asia’s Greater Mekong Subregion (GMS), the battle against malaria is advancing at a rapid pace.
Between 2012 and 2017, reported malaria cases fell by a staggering 84%, with deaths from the disease down by 93%.
In Cambodia, China’s Yunnan Province, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Lao PDR), Myanmar, Thailand, and Vietnam, more people are free of malaria’s deadly menace than ever before.
To understand the magnitude of this achievement, it helps to go back to 2008, when artemisinin-resistant malaria parasites were first confirmed along the vast, densely forested Thai-Cambodian border.
That finding immediately became a source of deep concern, because artemisinin is a critical ingredient in treatments for Plasmodium falciparum malaria, the deadliest form of the mosquito-borne parasite.
The discovery of resistant strains of malaria meant not just that it would be harder to treat, but that the overall approach to fighting the disease would have to change.
National malaria prevention and treatment programs were fortified, and monitoring at field operations in affected areas was tightened significantly.
At the same time, greater cross-border collaboration, along with up-to-date information about emerging multidrug resistance in the GMS, became essential.
At first, cross-border collaboration was limited to Thailand and Cambodia, the two countries where drug-resistant parasites were first confirmed.
But, by 2011, China, Myanmar, Vietnam, and Lao PDR – with support from the World Health Organization’s South-East Asia and Western Pacific offices – were also on the case.
Public-health authorities throughout the region were providing actionable, up-to-date parasitological data, and taking clear steps to address the problem.
In 2013, the WHO launched its Emergency Response to Artemisinin Resistance in the GMS.
As support from Australia’s Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, The Global Fund, the UK Department for International Development, the US Agency for International Development, and the US President’s Malaria Initiative was being provided, resolve to confront the challenge was crystallizing throughout the subregion.
Then under the WHO’s Strategy for Malaria Elimination in the Greater Mekong Subregion 2015-2030, the emphasis shifted from controlling drug resistance to pursuing total malaria elimination.
The WHO provided public-health authorities in the GMS with the technical and strategic guidance needed to make the dramatic, life-changing advances that we have seen in recent years.
Although there have been challenges along the way, the GMS’s progress so far suggests that it could eliminate the Plasmodium falciparum parasite by 2025, and eliminate malaria completely by 2030, at the latest.
To succeed, however, all of those involved in the fight against malaria will need to focus on five core areas.
Any lapse on the part of one country can and will have consequences elsewhere, so it is crucial that leaders remain resolute.
Fortunately, at a high-level meeting last December in Nay Pyi Taw, Myanmar, delegates from all six GMS countries explored ways to accelerate malaria reduction in the region.
National malaria programs should allocate more resources to hard-to-reach communities that lack access to health care.
They also need to extend all of the services they provide to non-citizens, which will require building trust within remote communities.
Third, we must do more to eliminate poor-quality antimalarial medicines.
To that end, the GMS’s region-wide ban on the production and marketing of oral artemisinin-based monotherapies, which actually contribute to drug resistance, is to be commended, as is the strengthening of national supply chains to improve the availability of high-quality medicines.
Fourth, GMS countries need to establish more robust surveillance systems and fully leverage existing channels for sharing information at the regional level.
With improved surveillance – and with the WHO’s regional data-sharing platform – national malaria programs will be better positioned to redirect resources as needed, especially in the event of an outbreak.
And, finally, the GMS countries must embrace research and development, to improve their understanding of malaria parasites and the mosquitoes that spread them.
Specifically, there is a need for more high-quality data on the performance of programmatic interventions, and on the efficacy of current treatments.
The GMS must take full advantage of the opportunity it now has to eliminate malaria.
The subregion’s national leaders are paying attention to the problem, international partners are offering their support, and local public-health agencies have a wide range of effective tools at their disposal.
Given that malaria still threatens millions of people, there is no room for delay or loss of focus.
We must build on the GMS’s remarkable progress and eliminate malaria once and for all.
NEW YORK – In public policy, peace talks, election campaigns, or corporate strategy, laying out intentions, promises, and commitments is never enough.
It is merely a first step toward a desired end – and entirely meaningless unless the second, third, and all subsequent necessary steps are taken.
Moreover, taking the first step starts the clock on others' trust and confidence that the next steps will in fact be taken, or else risks creating the false impression that the failure to achieve a particular goal reflects mistaken (or irrelevant) intentions, not inadequate execution.
Consider the European Central Bank's announcement in January that it would implement quantitative easing.
At the time, many leaders seemed to think that the ECB's move would be enough: Announcement made, money printed, economies back on track.
Unfortunately, that is not how monetary policy works: QE will not be enough, and no one should be naive about that.
In order to get economies back on track, QE is a useful step, but only as part of a larger package of measures.
In the absence of other economic reforms, QE on its own cannot effect the changes needed to kick-start growth.
And if the reforms are not implemented and growth fails to materialize, politicians are likely to blame QE, not their own failure to take all the other steps that must follow it on the path of economic recovery.
Following the massacre at the satirical magazine Charlie Hebdo in Paris last month, world leaders dashed to the scene, locked arms, and marched in support of freedom of expression as a bedrock principle of civilized societies.
The natural next step for many of them should have been to return home and immediately implement that principle.
True, Egypt's military regime – whose foreign minister, Sameh Shoukry, raised eyebrows when he appeared near the head of the march in Paris – released the Al Jazeera journalist Peter Greste from prison, and has since freed two other journalists, Mohamed Fahmy and Baher Mohamed, on bail.
But where is the regime's renunciation of the authority to have imprisoned them in the first place?
In another arena, peace negotiations, the recent ceasefire agreement in Ukraine is but the latest attempt to end the war between the country's government and Russian-backed separatists that has been raging for much of the past year in the eastern Donbas region.
Throughout the fighting, attempts to stop the killing have come and gone, and the war's innocent victims – not to mention much of the international community – have grown weary and cynical.
The first step – signing the agreement – represents the parties' commitment to take the necessary subsequent steps.
Everyone walks away knowing exactly what they are supposed to do, what to expect others to do, and what the consequences will be if they do not.
When agreements fail, it is usually not because of what they contain, but because of what is missing, or because of what the signatories do despite what they have agreed.
Election campaigns are the example par excellence of the phenomenon, and the world is now entering another “Season of the First Step."
At least seven general elections will be held in European Union member countries this year (and France will hold regional elections in March).
Greece has already voted (electing a government that so far seems unable to move beyond intentions and commitments), and the coming months will bring elections in Estonia, Finland, the United Kingdom, Denmark, Portugal, Poland, and Spain.
Add to this the US presidential election next year – preceded by a campaign that has already started – and we can expect a lot of promises floating around.
As voters in these countries are inundated with good intentions, ringing assurances, and solemn commitments, they will expect parties and candidates to follow through if they are elected.
Certainly, parties and candidates attempt to persuade voters on the basis of their track records (and by impugning their opponents' track records).
If they do not follow through on their intentions, promises, and commitments, access to information and instant communication is such that empty promises simply will no longer persuade most people.
They send their leaders before law-making bodies to express contrition for grave malfeasance and promise future good behavior.
And yet the headlines are as filled as ever with stories of unethical, if not outright criminal, corporate behavior.
Unfortunately, too many corporate leaders persist in viewing the world as “us" versus “them," rather than attempting to understand why, in the absence of vigorous action, no one trusts them.
There is no easy solution for the eurozone economy, for Greece, for Ukraine, or for any of the other major challenges we face today.
But unless protagonists are sure that announcements, campaign promises, and peace agreements will give rise to clear, purposeful action, they should think twice before opening their mouths.
LIMA – Nowadays, globalization’s opponents seem increasingly to be drowning out its defenders.
If they get their way, the post-World War II international order – which aimed, often successfully, to advance peace and prosperity through exchange and connection – could well collapse.
Every aspect of globalization – free trade, free movement of capital, and international migration – is under attack.
Leading the charge are antagonistic forces – from populist political parties to separatist groups to terrorist organizations – whose actions tend to focus more on what they oppose than on what they support.
In Russia and Asia, anti-Western groups are at the forefront of the campaign against globalization.
In Europe, populist parties have tended to emphasize their aversion to European integration, with those on the right often also condemning immigration, while the left denounces rising economic inequality.
In Africa, tribal separatists oppose anyone standing in the way of independence.
And in the Middle East, the Islamic State (ISIS) virulently rejects modernity – and targets societies that embrace it.
Despite their differences, these groups have one thing in common: a deep hostility toward international structures and interconnectedness (though, of course, a murderous group like ISIS is in a different category from, say, European populists).
They do not care that the international order they want to tear down enabled the rapid post-1945 economic growth that liberated billions of developing-country citizens from poverty.
All they see are massive, unbending institutions and intolerable inequalities in wealth and income, and they blame globalization.
The world is a very unequal place, and inequality within societies has widened considerably in recent decades.
But this is not because of international trade or movements of people; after all, cross-border trade and migration have been happening for thousands of years.
The anti-globalization movements’ proposed solution – closing national borders to trade, people, or anything else – thus makes little sense.
In fact, such an approach would hurt virtually everyone, not just the wealthy elites who have benefited most from globalized markets.
To answer that question, we must consider what about globalization is generating returns for the wealthy.
A central aspect of globalization is the careful documentation of the knowledge and legal tools needed to combine the property rights of seemingly useless single assets (electronic parts, legal rights to production, and so on) into complex wholes (an iPhone), and appropriate the surplus value they generate.
Clear and accessible ledgers that faithfully describe not only who controls what and where, but also the rules governing potential combinations – of, say, collateral, components, producers, entrepreneurs, and legal and property rights – are vital for the system to function.
The problem is that five billion people around the world are not documented in national ledgers in anything approaching an organized manner.
Instead, their entrepreneurial talents and legal rights to assets are recorded in hundreds of scattered records and rules systems throughout their countries, making them internationally inaccessible.
Under these conditions, it is impossible for the majority of humanity to participate effectively in their national economies, much less the global one.
Without any means of participating in the process of producing high-value combinations, people have no chance of seizing some of the surplus value created.
So it is a lack of consolidated, documented knowledge – not free trade – that is fueling inequality worldwide.
Just determining how many people are left out took my organization, the Institute for Liberty and Democracy (ILD), two decades of fieldwork, conducted by more than 1,000 researchers in some 20 countries.
The lawyers and corporate elites who draft and enact the legislation and regulations that govern globalization are disconnected from those who are supposed to implement the policies at the local level.
Experience in Japan, the United States, and Europe shows that a straightforward legal approach to ensuring equal rights and opportunities can take a century or more.
But there is a faster way: treating the missing links as a break not in a legal chain, but in a knowledge chain.
We spent 15 years adding millions of people to the globalized legal system, by bringing the knowledge contained in marginal ledgers into the legal mainstream – all without the help of computers.
But we do not have decades more to spend on this process; we need to bring in billions more people, and fast.
Last year, ILD began, with pro bono support from Silicon Valley firms, to determine whether information technology, and specifically blockchain (the transparent, secure, and decentralized online ledger that underpins Bitcoin), could enable more of the world’s population to get in on globalization.
By translating the language of the legal chain into a digital language – an achievement that required us to develop a set of 21 typologies – we have created a system that could locate and capture any ledger in the world and make it public.
Moreover, we have been able to compress into 34 binary indicators the questions that computers have to ask captured ledgers to determine which provisions should be inserted in blockchain smart contracts between globalized firms and non-globalized collectives.
By democratizing the law, perhaps it can save globalization – and the international order.
TALLINN – Every day seems to bring a new revelation about Russia’s political meddling in Western countries.
From Twitter trolls sowing discord among voters, to the Kremlin’s alleged support for extremist groups, Russian propaganda is undermining trust in democratic governance.
And although Western politicians may talk tough in response to the Kremlin’s efforts to upend the status quo, their actions often betray a weaker hand.
The Finnish author Sofi Oksanen once observed that Russia’s information warfare works because its targets are often willing participants.
During the Cold War, for example, Finland’s economic dependence on raw materials and technology from Russia left its leaders loath to antagonize the Kremlin.
This phenomenon – “Finlandization” – helps explain why, when Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn’s The Gulag Archipelago was translated into Finnish in 1974, the first edition was printed in neighboring Sweden.
In 1944, the British establishment tried to prevent publication of George Orwell’s Animal Farm; then-editor T.S. Eliot argued that the book’s anti-Soviet “point of view” was “not convincing.”
No one, it seemed, wanted to anger Stalin, who was then an ally of Great Britain.
In the Baltic states, people are increasingly worried that geopolitical competition over the Nord Stream 2 gas pipeline linking Russia to Germany will affect writers’ freedom of speech to opine on Russian President Vladimir Putin’s regime.
I am acutely aware of how dangerous it can be to run afoul of Russian interests.
In 2009, I edited a series of essays with Oksanen documenting official practices in Estonia when it was part of the Soviet Union.
Our book Fear Was Behind Everythingdetailed the terror that gripped Estonia under the Soviet system.
For a half-century, any book that was critical of the communist regime was banned in the Baltic states and was not published in Finland, either.
The idea for our book was inspired by an incident in 2007, when the statue of a Soviet soldier, the symbol of occupation forces in Estonia, was relocated from central Tallinn to a military cemetery elsewhere in the city.
Russia protested the move, and deadly riots erupted amid rumors that the government was denying Estonian Russians the right to mourn their war dead.
The next year, Johan Bäckman, a docent at Helsinki University, published a book about the incident, The Bronze Soldier, in which he called Estonia an “apartheid state” led by incompetent leaders whose citizens were incapable of coming to terms with their own history.
His publisher was an Estonian-born journalist and former KGB officer, Vladimir Ilyasevich, who had worked in Finland and in other Nordic countries during the Cold War.
Bäckman then trained his pro-Russian vitriol on me.
First, he attacked a book I had written about my mother’s trauma in a Soviet gulag, and then he helped organized protests against the release of Fear Was Behind Everything.
Because of these threats, we requested armed police protection on the day of the book’s launch in 2009.
And, while Bäckman has since left his teaching job and directs most of his attention to spouting other pro-Putin falsehoods, the Russian-backed propaganda war he helped wage continues to affect my sense of security.
Simply put, the old Soviet system of fear continues to wreak havoc on the truth and punish those who defend it on the page.
While Russia’s propaganda efforts may be aimed at influencing governments, it is individuals who suffer the consequences.
As the chief executive of the Estonian International Center for Defense and Security, Dmitri Teperik, recently argued, information wars are most dangerous for “civil activists” – like journalists, writers, and authors – because we are the ones on the front lines.
Nearly three decades after the fall of the Iron Curtain, Russia maintains its Soviet-era proclivity to prey on peoples’ fears and insecurities.
Its operatives are happiest when their opponents cease their activities – when writers stop writing, or publishers stop publishing.
Unfortunately, Russia succeeds more than it fails because it is easy to misinform; as Noam Chomsky once said, people don’t know what they don’t know.
The best chance truth has is if writers and authors persist in presenting readers with facts; every now and then, we are rewarded for these efforts.
Earlier this year, the Finnish journalist Jessikka Aro took Bäckman to court, after having become a target of his malice since 2014, when she started exposing the Kremlin’s social media “troll” factory.
But, with any luck, Bäckman will be punished for his harassment and baseless attacks.
His trial could even mark a definitive moment in the history of efforts to counter Russian propaganda, giving beleaguered writers and journalists the courage they need to stand up to Russia in ways that governments rarely have.
LONDON – “I have a request for all Egyptians,” General Abdel Fattah El-Sisi, Egypt’s president, declared in 2013.
Just three weeks after staging the most brutal military coup in Egypt’s history, he wanted “all honorable, decent Egyptians” to take to the streets to march for the military, thereby giving him and his army “a mandate and an order to fight potential violence and terrorism.”
Yet, three years later, the violence and terrorism Sisi pledged to prevent remain a potent reality.
In fact, the military itself has been a leading perpetrator – and instigator – of violence.
Its assertion of leadership included cracking down on anyone who protested the overthrow of Egypt’s first-ever freely elected president, Mohammed Morsi.
The crackdown culminated on August 14, 2013, when the military stormed sit-ins in Cairo’s Raba‘a Square and Giza’s al-Nahda Square, and carried out what Human Rights Watch called the “worst mass unlawful killings in Egypt’s modern history” and “a likely crime against humanity.”
The Egyptian Center for Social and Economic Rights recorded 932 fully documented bodies, 294 partly documented bodies, and 29 undocumented bodies, including 17 women and 30 teenage girls and boys.
The message was clear: those in power were clearly convinced that eradicating their opponents was a better strategy than including them.
Young political activists who wanted change quickly realized that ballots, strikes, and sit-ins would not change a corrupt regime – and might well get them killed.
Unsurprisingly, the coup and subsequent crackdown on opponents triggered a spike in an enduring insurgency.
Almost immediately, in response to an already restive North Sinai, elite brigades from the Second and Third Field Armies, assisted by the air force, launched operation “Desert Storm” to quell the burgeoning rebellion.
Afterward, the military spokesperson declared that 78 “terrorists” had been killed and 207 arrested, effectively ending terrorism in the Sinai.
A few months later, Sinai insurgents shot down a Mi-17 helicopter that belonged to the Second Field Army, an unprecedented display of military capacity.
By November 2014, local rebels were swearing their loyalty to the so-called Islamic State (ISIS) – another unprecedented move.
(No jihadist organization in Egypt had ever before offered its loyalty to a foreign entity.)
Like other ISIS-affiliated groups, the so-called Sinai Province publishes its military metrics and reports both monthly and annually.
Those data indicate that, last year, SP killed about 800 soldiers and 130 civilians (alleged informants or collaborators).
It also claims to have captured heavy mortars, two ZU-23 anti-aircraft autocannons, five DShK heavy machine guns, and dozens of AK assault rifles.
In October 2015, SP operatives infiltrated Sharm al-Sheikh Airport and planted a bomb on a Russian Airbus, killing all 224 of its passengers and crew.
In the first two months of this year, SP reported that it had destroyed 25 armored vehicles (including tanks, minesweepers, and bulldozers) and killed 100 soldiers (the military acknowledged 37).
And, though the insurgency has remained largely limited to Egypt’s periphery, primarily Northeastern Sinai and parts of the Western Desert, with occasional strikes in the Nile Valley, it has also reared its head in Cairo.
Most recently, gunmen attacked an undercover security minibus in Cairo's Helwan suburb last May, killed all eight armed security agents, and vanished into the working-class cement jungle.
Meanwhile, the relative moderates who have remained committed to contesting official policies by democratic means are sidelined and mocked.
One prominent example is Essam Derbala, the head of the Consultative Council of the Islamic Group (IG), a post-jihadist organization that led a terror campaign in the early 1990s, before abandoning political violence in 1997 and engaging in mainstream politics.
From 2002 to 2009, Derbala and other IG leaders produced around 30 books to counter al-Qaeda’s ideology.
After ISIS announced its intention to declare a “province” in Upper Egypt in April 2015, Derbala toured the Upper-Egyptian IG strongholds, giving public lectures countering ISIS ideology.
Among his last messages to his supporters was “not to give up on democracy and peaceful resistance.”
Derbala’s death reinforced the view that, in today’s Egypt, relative moderation gets you nowhere – a view that drives radicalization.
Consider Ahmed El-Darawy, a former police officer and a popular pro-democracy activist who ran in Egypt’s first free and fair parliamentary election in 2012.
After the Raba‘a Square massacre, however, he joined ISIS, under whose flag he was ultimately killed.
One of the main motivations behind the 2013 military coup was to counter potential violence and terrorism.
Yet one of its main upshots is a surge in violence and terrorism, committed by both state and non-state actors – and there is no sign of de-escalation, much less reconciliation, in sight.
On one side, sectors of the economy demonstrate extraordinary productivity, and have won big shares of international markets.
For example, the mechanical industries in the Veneto and in Emilia led by Carararo, and Ducati, as well as the optical industry in the Northeast with Luxottica in the lead.
These are firms known across the globe, and which are often the objects of acquisitive interest from foreign competitors or great international investors, such as Piaggio and Stefanel.
On the other hand, Italy's economy as a whole is stagnant: in the last ten years Italy has been growing more slowly than the median in Europe, which is already seeing much lower growth rates than the United States.
In the last eight years per capita GDP has increased, on average, by 3.2% per year in America, 2% in Europe, and only 1.2% in Italy.
How are these two economic facts to be reconciled and what does this divided economy tell us about Europe, east and west, as well as other economies where the percentage of people in work may be stagnant or falling?
The answer is at the same time simple and rich in consequences for economic policy.
GDP per capita (that is, GDP divided by the total population) depends on two factors: the productivity of those who work (that is, GDP divided by the number of people employed), and the number of people who work as a proportion of the population.
In order for an increase in the productivity of those who work to result in a growth of GDP per capita it is necessary that productivity growth not be not nullified by a simultaneous reduction in the number, and thus the proportion, of those who work.
Such a reduction happens not only when unemployment goes up, but also when the number of those who do not participate in the labor force grows: students, retired people, the unemployed who are discouraged and stop looking for work and so abandon the labor force.
In Italy, the country's stagnant GDP masks two phenomena which cancel each other out.
Productivity grows due to the expansion of the most dynamic and efficient firms, but the percentage of those who work is decreasing all the time.
The result is that the productive sectors of the economy do not succeed in "pulling" with them the ever greater mass of people who do not work.
The ratio of the labor force (that is those who are employed and those unemployed who are actively looking for work) to the number of people of working age is equal to 75% in USA, 76% in Great Britain, around 68% in France and Germany, and 58% in Italy.
Among OECD countries, the only one with a percentage of participation in the economy lower than that of Italy is Turkey, where 53% of the population makes up the labor force.
Considering that the Italian 58% includes the unemployed, only about half of Italians of working age are now working or even looking for work.
This percentage is lower today than in 1970, while in the United States the equivalent number has increased from 65% to 78%.
True, a small part of the near half of the population who officially do not work are employed in the underground economy, but this is small consolation; certainly it is not in those sectors that the future of the Italian economy is to be found.
What accounts for this propensity of people not to look for work, and why does what is happening in Italy matter to other countries?
First of all, an extremely generous system of retirement benefits makes the "no work" option attractive, though not quite obligatory.
Indeed, abandoning work at an ever younger age relative to the longer life expectancy of Italians is something particularly worrying.
In the second place, low labor force participation is a response to the heightened fiscal pressure that results from the burden of having to pay for all the retirement pensions of today's fifty-year-olds.
The pressure affects those who do work and, because of the heavier tax burden, makes work less attractive for them, especially for the second members of a family.
When a man works and marginal tax rates are very high, the wife very often prefers to stay at home.
Finally, the propensity not to look for work results from a university system that accepts anyone and which does not offer any disincentive to those who seek to indefinitely prolong their so-called "studies."
This state of affairs is reproduced inside individual families: young people of 30 survive thanks to the work of the head of the family, who supports everyone.
Reform of the pension system is often attacked as a zero-sum game, in which whatever one person loses another gains.
Put in these terms, the problem is always solved by giving more to those who have the most political power.
Professor Nicola Rossi, economic advisor to Prime Minister Massimo D'Alema, in the title of his recent book, expresses the wish that we give "Less to the Fathers and More to the Sons."
But if unions are powerful or seniors are in the majority (in Italy the two coincide, because seniors are the majority in all labor unions), the exact opposite happens.
Italy's recent budget, which neither confronted the pensions issue nor the issue of fiscal reform, demonstrates this fully.
Here is the grand delusion of the budget and the Finance Ministry in Italy.
Neither seems capable, and in fact neither has tried to understand, that we are not dealing with a zero some gain.
Those countries who also provide disincentives to work should keep Italy's sluggishness in mind and learn the lessons Italy's government has ignored.
NEW YORK – The Great Recession of 2008 has morphed into the North Atlantic Recession: it is mainly Europe and the United States, not the major emerging markets, that have become mired in slow growth and high unemployment.
And it is Europe and America that are marching, alone and together, to the denouement of a grand debacle.
A busted bubble led to a massive Keynesian stimulus that averted a much deeper recession, but that also fueled substantial budget deficits.
The response – massive spending cuts – ensures that unacceptably high levels of unemployment (a vast waste of resources and an oversupply of suffering) will continue, possibly for years.
It had no choice: with financial turmoil threatening to spread from small countries like Greece and Ireland to large ones like Italy and Spain, the euro’s very survival was in growing jeopardy.
Europe’s leaders recognized that distressed countries’ debts would become unmanageable unless their economies could grow, and that growth could not be achieved without assistance.
But, even as Europe’s leaders promised that help was on the way, they doubled down on the belief that non-crisis countries must cut spending.
The resulting austerity will hinder Europe’s growth, and thus that of its most distressed economies: after all, nothing would help Greece more than robust growth in its trading partners.
And low growth will hurt tax revenues, undermining the proclaimed goal of fiscal consolidation.
The discussions before the crisis illustrated how little had been done to repair economic fundamentals.
The European Central Bank’s vehement opposition to what is essential to all capitalist economies – the restructuring of failed or insolvent entities’ debt – is evidence of the continuing fragility of the Western banking system.
The ECB argued that taxpayers should pick up the entire tab for Greece’s bad sovereign debt, for fear that any private-sector involvement (PSI) would trigger a “credit event,” which would force large payouts on credit-default swaps (CDSs), possibly fueling further financial turmoil.
But, if that is a real fear for the ECB – if it is not merely acting on behalf of private lenders – surely it should have demanded that the banks have more capital.
Likewise, the ECB should have barred banks from the risky CDS market, where they are held hostage to ratings agencies’ decisions about what constitutes a “credit event.”
Indeed, one positive achievement by European leaders at the recent Brussels summit was to begin the process of reining in both the ECB and the power of the American ratings agencies.
Indeed, the most curious aspect of the ECB’s position was its threat not to accept restructured government bonds as collateral if the ratings agencies decided that the restructuring should be classified as a credit event.
The whole point of restructuring was to discharge debt and make the remainder more manageable.
If the bonds were acceptable as collateral before the restructuring, surely they were safer after the restructuring, and thus equally acceptable.
This episode serves as a reminder that central banks are political institutions, with a political agenda, and that independent central banks tend to be captured (at least “cognitively”) by the banks that they are supposed to regulate.
There, the extreme right threatened to shut down the US government, confirming what game theory suggests: when those who are irrationally committed to destruction if they don’t get their way confront rational individuals, the former prevail.
As a result, President Barack Obama acquiesced in an unbalanced debt-reduction strategy, with no tax increases – not even for the millionaires who have done so well during the past two decades, and not even by eliminating tax giveaways to oil companies, which undermine economic efficiency and contribute to environmental degradation.
Optimists argue that the short run macroeconomic impact of the deal to raise America’s debt ceiling and prevent sovereign default will be limited – roughly $25 billion in expenditure cuts in the coming year.
But the payroll-tax cut (which put more than $100 billion into the pockets of ordinary Americans) was not renewed, and surely business, anticipating the contractionary effects down the line, will be even more reluctant to lend.
And, with housing prices continuing to fall, GDP growth faltering, and unemployment remaining stubbornly high (one of six Americans who would like a full-time job still cannot get one), more stimulus, not austerity, is needed – for the sake of balancing the budget as well.
The single most important driver of deficit growth is weak tax revenues, owing to poor economic performance; the single best remedy would be to put America back to work.
After all, America’s financial mismanagement played an important role in triggering Europe’s problems, and financial turmoil in Europe would not be good for the US – especially given the fragility of the US banking system and the continuing role it plays in non-transparent CDSs.
But the real problem stems from another form of contagion: bad ideas move easily across borders, and misguided economic notions on both sides of the Atlantic have been reinforcing each other.
NEW YORK – Since my teenage years, I have been fascinated by the permutations and machinations of national politics.
Today, I find myself focusing on broader political trends that also help to explain global economic issues.
Fringe movements, some operating within established political structures, and others seeking to create new ones, are placing pressure on traditional parties, making it difficult for them to mobilize their supporters, and, in some cases, causing them real damage.
Desperate not to appear weak, long-established parties have become wary of cooperating across the aisle.
The resulting refusal to work together on the major issues of the day has had a dramatic impact on economic policies.
Once formulated through negotiations conducted at the political center, where Western democracies have long been anchored, policymaking is increasingly shaped by stubborn forces on the extreme left and right.
This approach has, it must be said, yielded the occasional breakthrough – sometimes good, sometimes bad.
But the overall result has been policy paralysis, with even the most basic elements of economic governance (such as actively passing a budget in the United States) suffering as a result.
Needless to say, the greater the governance and policy challenges at home, the more difficult regional and global cooperation becomes.
After its success on the national stage in the 2010 midterm congressional election, many Republican lawmakers became so concerned about securing their party’s “base” for future re-election bids that they no longer felt comfortable pursuing the type of bipartisan cooperation that underpin effective economic policymaking.
By contributing to a shutdown of federal-government operations and repeatedly raising the threat of a technical default, it risked undermining an already-fragile US economic recovery.
While the movement has evolved and no longer threatens to hold the economy hostage, it continues to contribute to overall policy paralysis.
Europe now seems to be headed down a similar path, as non-traditional parties – many of them driven by single issues – become increasingly influential.
Movements like France’s anti-immigration National Front are making leading mainstream parties more likely to pander to extremists in order to preserve their support.
Of course, their fear is not irrational, as Pasok, a long-established left-wing party in Greece, found out when the far-left, anti-austerity Syriza Party surged to victory in January.
But that does not change the fact that parties’ need to address their electoral fears is causing serious damage to national policymaking.
Indeed, most established parties are so busy playing defense that they have little inclination to engage in the type of forward-looking strategic thinking that is needed to re-energize exhausted growth models, anchor financial stability, and ensure that technological innovation enables broad-based prosperity.
As a result, Western economies are running chronically below their potential – and risk undermining their future potential.
That is why future generations will likely remember this as a time of lost economic opportunities.
Instead of bowing to polarization and paralysis, policymakers should be promoting growth- and productivity-enhancing infrastructure investments, funded at exceptionally low interest rates, scaling up labor-market reforms, and working to address the growing income and wealth inequality that is increasingly limiting access to economic opportunity.
Likewise, policymakers should be revamping incoherent and inconsistent tax structures that are riddled with unfair exemptions.
And they should be pursuing immigration reform to overhaul a system that penalizes talent, encourages malfeasance, and, as illustrated by the thousands of migrants who have drowned in the Mediterranean Sea in recent years while trying to reach Europe, often leads to human tragedy.
Despite widespread dissatisfaction with political institutions in many Western countries – the US Congress, for example, has very low approval ratings – it is difficult to see what will break the current logjam.
Add to that an increasingly polarized and quasi-tribal news media, which can amplify divisions in society, and the scope for collaborative transformation is extremely limited.
For their part, many of the fringe parties, despite their rising popularity, are struggling to achieve power, a challenge illustrated in the recent British election.
And those that succeed, such as Syriza, quickly become frustrated by the largely immovable systems in which they must operate – a situation that their lack of governing experience makes all the more difficult.
Over time, Western political systems will evolve to meet the needs of their economies.
But, in the interim, the vast majority of companies and households will have to cope with systems that do relatively less to help them reach their potential, placing them at a disadvantage vis-à-vis competitors operating in more supportive systems.
To some extent, technological innovation will pick up the slack, as it empowers individuals and companies to live more self-directed lives, creating pockets of excellence and wellbeing.
But, while this is good news for some, it is inadequate to arrest the rising inequality of income, wealth, and opportunity – or to unleash the inclusive prosperity that Western economies can and should be generating.
MEXICO CITY – Supporters of Hugo Chávez, the recently deceased Venezuelan president, and even many of his critics, have repeatedly emphasized two supposed achievements that will burnish his legacy.
First, the share of people living in poverty plummeted to approximately 28% in 2012, from a peak of 62% in 2003 (though it was 46% three years earlier, at the beginning of Chávez’s first term).
Second, he gave to a majority of Venezuelans a sense of identity, pride, and dignity long denied them by a corrupt, elitist, light-skinned oligarchy.
Both claims, however, are only partly true, and only partly account for Chávez’s recurrent electoral victories – 13 of 14 popular votes, including referenda.
As for the first claim, both The Economist and the Nobel laureate Mario Vargas Llosa were right to put Chávez’s achievement in perspective.
Almost every country in Latin America has reduced poverty significantly since the beginning of this century, with the extent of progress depending on baselines and cut-off dates, good years and bad years, the reliability of official data, and other factors.
The reasons for this progress are well known: with the exception of 2001 and 2009, these were boom years for commodity-exporting countries like Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Chile, and, of course, Venezuela, as well as for manufacturing-based economies, like Mexico.
Furthermore, during these nearly 15 years, most governments have managed their accounts responsibly: small or no fiscal deficits, low inflation, well-targeted anti-poverty programs, and so on.
This has helped to lower not only poverty, but also inequality, Latin America’s traditional scourge.
According to the economist Nora Lustig, between 2000 and 2010, “income inequality…declined in all 17 Latin American countries for which comparable data exist.”
The decline was especially pronounced in the three largest countries – Brazil, Mexico, and Argentina – which comprise nearly 75% of the region’s population.
One difference in Venezuela is that Chávez spent more than $1 trillion to achieve the same feat – in a country with a population one-sixth the size of Brazil’s and slightly more than one-quarter the size of Mexico’s.
While the long-term viability and effectiveness of conditional cash-transfer programs in Brazil and Mexico is questionable, these anti-poverty initiatives certainly are better designed than Chávez’s massive, blanket subsidies on everything from poultry and flour to housing and gasoline.
Then there is the destruction of Venezuelan industry, the spectacular increase in violence, the explosion of foreign debt, and the depletion of foreign-currency reserves that has accompanied Chávez’s so-called “Bolivarian socialism of the twenty-first century.”
None of these problems has afflicted the region’s other large countries – or at least not to anywhere near the same extent.
If Chávez had not played with the numbers, as demagogues and populist leaders tend to do, the results would be more disheartening.
The second argument in defense of Chávez’s legacy is a bit more robust, but not much.
True, Venezuela’s immense natural riches have been exploited and often squandered by elites more accustomed to the boulevards of Miami than to the slums of Caracas.
But it is equally true that Venezuela enjoyed 40 years of democratic rule before Chávez, under the 1958 Punto Fijo Pact, whereby two parties, one social democratic and the other social Christian, alternated in power peacefully.
Venezuela also boasted one of the region’s most vibrant civil societies, with some of its freest and most vigorous media.
With the exception of the Caracazo – a wave of protests against free-market reforms in 1989 that resulted in an estimated 3,000 deaths – there were only minor bouts of repression.
To be sure, large swaths of Venezuelan society rightly felt excluded from the country’s cozy elite consensus and insular governing arrangements, and resented it immensely; but an aspiring middle class comprised roughly half the population.
Chávez exploited – and widened – that division; indeed, as the current campaign to elect his successor shows, the country remains more polarized than ever.
It may well be that Chávez’s purported feats and popularity will outlast him.
Instead of a simple rotation of elites in power, perhaps what occurred during his time in office was the advent of political leadership that looks, talks, worships, and loves like the people of the country – leadership that identifies with and benefits the millions of Venezuelans who previously were marginalized.
In that case, Chávez’s designated successor, Nicolás Maduro, will make short work of opposition candidate Henrique Capriles in the upcoming election.
But, whatever the outcome, all the mourning and embalming will not alter a simple fact: Venezuela and its people are not clearly better off than they were 14 years ago.
And whatever modest improvements they may feel in their lives were also secured elsewhere, at a far lower economic and political cost.
A common feature of Europe's extreme right is its racism and use of the immigration issue as a political wedge.
The Lega Nord in Italy, the Vlaams Blok in the Netherlands, the supporters of Le Pen's National Front in France, are all examples of parties or movements formed on the common theme of aversion to immigrants and promotion of simplistic policies to control them.
While individuals like Jorg Haidar and Jean-Marie Le Pen may come and (never to soon) go, the race question will not disappear from European politics anytime soon.
An aging population at home and ever more open borders imply increasing racial fragmentation in European countries.
Mainstream parties of the center left and center right have confronted this prospect by hiding their heads in the ground, hoping against hope that the problem will disappear.
Race relations in the US have been for decades - and remain - at the center of political debate, to the point that racial cleavages are as important as income, if not more, as determinants of political preferences and attitudes.
The first step to address racial politics is to understand the origin and consequences of racial animosity, even if it means uncovering unpleasant truths.
This is precisely what a large amount of research in economics, sociology, psychology and political science has done for the US.
This research shows that people of different races trust each other much less; whites are less willing to support welfare spending because it is perceived to favor minorities; more racially fragmented communities have less efficient governments, more corruption and patronage, more crime and fewer productive public goods per tax dollar.
This does not mean that the answer is to eliminate heterogeneity and create racially homogenous communities, but an acknowledgment of the reality of these issues is needed in order to start constructing solid public policies toward race relations.
Some favor affirmative action programs that provide preferences for minorities in job allocation, college admission, and public contracts.
These policies are seen as a way of offering reparation for past injustices and, more importantly, for creating role models and for overcoming residual and perhaps involuntary discrimination.
Others object to affirmative action, and argue that a race-blind policy coupled with free market polices and pro-family values are all that are necessary to create jobs for minorities and help keep black families together.
The latter is a crucial in any policy, since one of the single most important causes of poverty in the US is the diffusion of single parents (read single mother) households in the black community.
Regardless of the correct answer, the point is that determining what to do about race is a dominant issue in US politics.
In the 1950s blacks could not sit in the front of busses, today two of the main players in US foreign politics are blacks.
To be sure, right wing American politicians continue deploy the "race card" as a tactical tool.
Take the case of Patrick Buchanan the former Nixon and Reagan aid who became an independent presidential candidate in the last election.
He recently published a successful book entitled" The Death of the West: How Dying Populations and Immigrant Invasion Imperil Our Country and Civilization."
But for every book like this there are ten others with a serious analysis of America's race question.
At most the question is dealt with narrowly, in terms of immigration quotas and border restrictions, not in terms of the social problems and opportunities created by an increasingly racially mixed Europe.
Of course, a clear immigration policy is needed in order to avoid the accumulation of illegal immigrants.
But this cannot be the end of it: border controls with Mexico are not the end of American policy towards domestic race issues!
Europeans, cushioned by generous welfare programs, are no longer prepared to accept "dirty jobs" in, say, agriculture or the leather industry.
Europeans, however, are prompt to criticize the US for any failure in their policy toward minorities and for any manifestation of racism across the Atlantic.
Reading the European press one often perceives a superiority complex towards the US over racial issues: they, the Americans, have problems with racism; we are immune from it, except for crazed neo-Nazi skinheads and their like.
What has happened in recent weeks, from Paris to Amsterdam, shows that the race problem in Europe is much deeper and, as in the US, stems from the sad truth that race relations are inherently difficult and trust and cooperative behavior does not travel well across racial lines.
If Europe's mainstream parties do not begin a more serious investment in understanding racial tensions in Europe and put "race" as one of their main priorities, individuals like Le Pen are bound to try filling the void with their message of hate.
Two diametrically opposed scenarios exist for what will happen to global real interest rates over the next generation.
Those who predict generally low interest rates over the next generation point to rapid growth of productivity and potential output in the world economy.
According to this view, the principal problem faced by central banks will not be restraining demand as it shoots above potential, but boosting demand as it lags behind potential.
They point to the fact that the world's major central banks - the Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank, and the Bank of Japan - have so firmly established their anti-inflation credibility that the inflation risk premium has been wrung out of interest rates.
Believers in low interest rates also emphasize shifts in income distribution in the United States away from labor and toward capital, which have greatly boosted firms' resources to finance investment internally and reduced their dependence on capital markets.
They point to rapid technological progress, which has boosted output from new and old capital investments.
With competition strong across the economy, they say that we can look forward to a generation of relatively high asset prices and relatively low real interest rates worldwide.
By contrast, those who predict generally high real interest rates over the next generation point to low savings rates in the US, high spending driven by demographic burdens in Europe, and feckless governments running chronic deficits and unsustainable fiscal policies.
Imagine a bunch of irresponsible Bush-like administrations making fiscal policy, forever.
They also cite investment opportunities in emerging markets, and make the obvious point that if China and India stay on track, their economies' relative weight in the world will double in the next decade or so, as rapid real growth is accompanied by appreciation in their real exchange rates.
Sooner or later, the Chinese and Indian central banks' desire to hold down exchange rates to boost exports and their rich citizens' desire to keep their money in accounts at Bank of America will be offset by the sheer magnitude of investment opportunities.
In this scenario, bond prices in post-industrial countries are heading for a serious fall - as are real estate prices in California, New York, and London.
One could emulate J.P. Morgan, whose standard response to questions about stock prices, bond prices, and interest rates was to say simply, "The market will fluctuate."
Another alternative is to recall the late Rudi Dornbusch, who taught that any economist who forecasts interest rates based on fundamentals is a fool, because fundamentals are complex and unstable, shifting suddenly and substantially.
Even if an economist correctly understands fundamentals, Dornbusch warned, that doesn't mean that markets do.
In forecasting interest rates one is engaged not in examining fundamentals, but in predicting what average market opinion expects average market opinion about fundamentals to be.
So let me place my bet - which I think is only 60% likely - and say that my best guess is that world real interest rates will be high over the next generation, and that current bond prices (and real estate prices) are not sustainable.
Four features of modern politics in the world's post-industrial core lead me to this conclusion:
· In the US, the collapse of "grownup" Republicans in Congress - the extraordinary failure of fiscal conservatives to mount any effective opposition to the Bush administration's renewed destabilization of American government finances.
The deficit orgy of the Reagan era is looking less like a freak political accident and more like a structural feature of Republican Party governance - what the modern Republican governing coalition tends to do whenever it gains power;
As Ron Suskind reports in his recent biography of Bush's first Treasury Secretary, Paul O'Neill, former Bush Budget Director Mitch Daniels once whispered to himself at the end of a disastrous meeting, "Not a typical Republican package.
But Daniels decided he would rather run for office in Indiana than take a stand in support of sound fiscal finance;
· The failure of Western European governments to even begin to think about how to address the coming fiscal crisis of the social-insurance state as a result of their aging populations;
· The inability of Western European governments to enact sufficiently bold liberalizing reforms to create the possibility of full employment, together with the failure of western European monetary policy to be sufficiently stimulative to create the reality of full employment.
The arguments for low interest rates seem to me to require a degree of government competence that is unlikely, given political parties' current positions and the existing structure of the institutions that make fiscal policy.
I hope to see governments in Western Europe and the US face up to their responsibilities and conduct sensible, sustainable fiscal policies.
NEW DELHI – Sri Lanka’s parliamentary election this month promises to shape not only the country’s political future, but also geopolitics in the wider Indian Ocean region, a global center of trade and energy flows that accounts for half of the world’s container traffic and 70% of its petroleum shipments.
The country’s strategic importance has not been lost on China, which has, to the dismay of India and the United States, been working hard to strengthen its presence in the Indian Ocean.
A leading contender in Sri Lanka’s upcoming election is former President Mahinda Rajapaksa, whose nine-year tenure, which ended in January with a shock defeat in the presidential election, was characterized by rising authoritarianism, nepotism, and corruption.
To be sure, Rajapaksa brought an end to the 26-year Tamil insurgency in 2009, causing many in the country’s dominant Sinhalese community to view him as a hero.
But it was a ruthless effort, during which Rajapaksa allegedly presided over war crimes, including the killing of up to 40,000 civilians in the final offensive against the Tamil rebels.
During Rajapaksa’s presidency, Sri Lanka’s relationship with India deteriorated, owing partly to his government’s failure to reconcile with the Tamil minority.
But the country’s relationship with China improved markedly, with Chinese firms winning a series of lucrative construction contracts that would secure Sri Lanka’s position as a key stop on China’s “maritime Silk Road” connecting Asia to Africa and the Middle East.
The maritime Silk Road is not just a trade initiative; it will also provide several access points for China’s navy in the Indian Ocean region, through accords for refueling, replenishment, crew rest, and maintenance.
This fusion of economic and military interests was apparent last fall, when Chinese attack submarines, in their first known voyages to the Indian Ocean, docked at the new Chinese-owned container terminal in the Sri Lankan capital of Colombo.
Rajapaksa’s successors, President Maithripala Sirisena and Prime Minister Ranil Wickremesinghe, seemed to recognize the risks that such collaboration with China entails.
Indeed, during the presidential election campaign, Sirisena – who had served as Minister of Health in Rajapaksa’s cabinet, before quitting to run against his former boss – has said that the contracts awarded to China by Rajapaksa are ensnaring Sri Lanka in a debt trap.
Likewise, in his election manifesto, Sirisena warns: “The land that the White Man took over by means of military strength is now being obtained by foreigners by paying ransom to a handful of persons… If this trend continues for another six years, our country would become a colony and we would become slaves.”
While the manifesto does not mention China by name, the implication is clear.
Once in power, Sirisena’s government put on hold the construction by Chinese firms of a $1.4 billion city on reclaimed land, and ordered investigations into environmental violations and corruption, including an alleged $1.1 million bribe by a Chinese state-run firm to Rajapaksa’s failed presidential reelection campaign.
Moreover, by passing a constitutional amendment, Sirisena rescinded some of the presidential powers that Rajapaksa had added, as well as restoring the two-term limit.
(Somewhat ironically, this has strengthened the position of Prime Minister, for which Rajapaksa is now vying.)
Last month, however, Sirisena suddenly decided to allow Rajapaksa to contest the parliamentary election on the ticket of the Sri Lanka Freedom Party – control of which Sirisena wrested from Rajapaksa after winning the presidency.
It seems that Sirisena’s increasingly strained relations with Wickremesinghe, whose pro-democracy United National Party is the SLFP’s main opponent in the upcoming election, together with growing factionalism within the SLFP, left the president little choice but to accommodate Rajapaksa.
If the SLFP were to win a majority in Parliament, it is not inevitable that Rajapaksa would lead the new government; that decision would be up to Sirisena.
The question, then, is how far Sirisena will go in accommodating his predecessor, and what Faustian bargain has he perhaps struck to win a parliamentary majority.
It should be noted that, even if Rajapaksa does not become prime minister, he is likely to win a seat in Parliament, providing him with the influence and political standing he needs to lead his SLFP faction more openly.
But, of course, his influence over national policy would be much greater as prime minister.
Rajapaksa’s authoritarian impulses mirror those of Turkey’s Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who, after serving as Prime Minister for more than a decade, became his country’s first directly elected president last year.
Just as Erdoğan fans Islamism in Turkey, Rajapaksa fuels Sinhalese nationalism in Sri Lanka.
China, however, would undoubtedly celebrate the return to power of Rajapaksa, who has accused Sri Lanka’s current government of “treating China like a criminal.”
Such a result would help ensure that the country becomes a key component in China’s Indian Ocean strategy.
In the coming election, Sri Lankan voters will effectively decide whether their country should kowtow to China’s regional ambitions or shape its own destiny by promoting an independent foreign policy and an open economy.
Sri Lanka is, after all, more than a “swing state” in the competition for maritime supremacy among China, India, and the US.
But the shared interests of Europe’s citizens lack adequate political representation – a failing that contributed to the current crisis.
The longer the crisis is treated exclusively as a technocratic issue, the more strongly the European Union will be pushed toward disintegration.
To avoid a breakup, Europe’s leaders should look to the ideas of James Madison, one of the authors of the United States Constitution and The Federalist Papers.
Currently, Madison’s co-author Alexander Hamilton is on everyone’s mind in Brussels, as watered-down versions of his concept of fiscal federalism are increasingly perceived as the solution to the eurozone’s malaise.
But Hamilton’s ideas are incomplete without Madison’s examination of how political representation should be structured in order to facilitate economic integration.
Madison’s “scheme of representation” included several innovative elements, two of which apply to the eurozone’s current crisis.
First, if institutions are structured in the right way, political representatives can articulate programs and policies that, as Madison put it, “refine and enlarge public views.”
Within an integrated economy, there are divergent categories of actors, such as creditors and debtors, or manufacturers and agricultural producers, the combination of which can affect the outlook of states and regions.
An effective system of representation, Madison argued, would create support for political projects that would render compatible these actors’ divergent, and potentially conflicting, interests.
To accomplish this, it must be in representatives’ self-interest to reconcile their constituents’ diverse interests, rather than represent homogenous groups.
Madison thus advocated creating positions at the local, state, and federal levels, and in diverse social capacities, as well as ensuring incentives and opportunities for representatives to combine and reconcile different interests at all levels of public policymaking.
Until recently, something approximating this arrangement prevailed in the European polity, redistributing integration’s gains to produce mutually beneficial outcomes for diverse European groups.
As a result, the system has not only stopped functioning, but some elements of it are actually pushing Europe towards disintegration.
This European polity lacks the second crucial element of Madison’s scheme: diversified political representation at the federal level.
Individual nation-states, regions, and special-interest groups are represented within the EU.
But, while common European causes arise daily, they have no Europe-wide political representation.
No single political party or politician in Brussels can claim to represent European citizens’ associated interests, because none has had to compete for Europe-wide public support.
As a result, nationally elected representatives are responsible for making crucial EU-level decisions.
As the eurozone crisis worsens, they are increasingly driven by domestic political pressures, and their motivation to accommodate common European interests diminishes.
To understand this polity’s absurdity, consider how American political elites would act under Europe’s current system of representation.
Imagine Republicans and Democrats from New York’s state legislature voting side by side against continued subsidies for Arizona.
Meanwhile, the governor of California rejects the use of federal rescue funds to keep Mississippi’s banks afloat, while the secretary of the California Department of Finance declares that Mississippi voters must decide whether or not to keep the dollar.
Eventually, New York legislators would grudgingly vote to support Arizona, on the condition that Arizona implement a strict and humiliating austerity program, and California would begin to support federal programs that aim to stabilize the “dollar zone.”
These representatives know that their states are net winners of the union, ultimately benefiting from giving two dollars to some of the weaker states for every dollar that they pay in federal taxes.
But they still have to fight for re-election at home, where political parties that portray citizens of Arizona or Mississippi as lazy rent-seekers are gaining traction.
As they close in on effective joint banking and fiscal policies incorporating more and more elements of Hamilton’s fiscal federalism, they are increasingly constrained by state politics – exactly as Europe’s leaders are inhibited in the current system.
It is no coincidence that Hamilton and Madison were co-authors of the constitution of the first modern economic union.
While trying to imitate America’s constitution would be impossible, given that it embodies several compromises specific to its time and place, European leaders must begin to incorporate Madison’s ideas into debates about the eurozone’s future.
CAMBRIDGE: Any writer of financial fiction would have an easy time setting the stage-ballooning valuations of stocks founded on exaggerated beliefs about the impact of new technologies on productivity, and gross over-confidence in the American model, are placed side-by-side with an all-pervasive global financial fragility, evidenced in the Asian crises, a moribund Japan, and chaotic Russia.
No one should be surprised if the real final chapter in the globalization story of the 1990s is a crash on Wall Street, well timed to the 70th anniversary of the drama of 1929.
From a "Black Tuesday" revisited, it will be but a short step to world depression.
Europe has no policy responses open to it to respond to such a calamity because its fiscal situation is already weak and the new European Central bank is tangled in ineffectiveness and a dated obsession with fighting inflation.
Japan will be incapable of responding because its government can't even keep its own economy above water.
And in America, where confidence is now excessive and exuberant, who would be surprised if the economy just plain collapses following a stock market implosion.
But do not believe it, people will say; the ingredients are exaggerated, the disaster is not about to come.
The value of stocks is almost twice GDP, far more than ever in history and at least a quarter higher than at the peak of Japan's bubble a decade ago.
Three years of 4% growth in an economy at full employment is asking for inflationary trouble.
On the supply side, whatever the truth of higher productivity growth and higher trend output growth, the story is not that good.
But on the demand side, gains in the stock market of the past 2 years keep pushing up spending and hence growth.
The Fed is expected to start raising rates next week and more in the coming months.
In the past, no US expansion has died in bed of old age, they have all been murdered by the Fed.
With some luck, this time will be different - the inflation problem is not yet acute and hence early and gradual restraint may produce slowdown rather than a recession.
What if the stock market is not scared off by the prospect of higher interest rates?
Then the going will be much rougher; first interest rates will rise a lot and then, on top, the stock market will tumble.
High rates and a deep fall of stocks - 20 or 30% - will surely put the US economy close to zero growth or worse.
In itself that is not terrible, but where is the assurance that it will not get worse.
With financial vulnerability everywhere, how can we be confident that the US, and the whole world, will not end up like Japan - one day on top of the world, the next day in the gutter.
There are good reasons to be confident that the coming US trouble spot will be more limited.
First, unlike when the Japanese bubble bust, the balance sheets of US banks are good and real estate is not overpriced.
If things go wrong, there are remedies: a big budget surplus is an invitation to big tax cuts, which in America do work, and fast.
So the going could be rough, as it always is when economies overheat.
But more likely this time is different people will say- famous last words to remember if the prognosis is wrong.
What lies ahead in the US is not just a spectacle that the rest of the world can watch with some schadenfreude.
The rest of the world will find it hard to decouple from US events.
Slowdown in America limits the chances for an upturn everywhere and trims the hopes for extra growth from Asia to Europe.
In Latin America, and in emerging markets more generally, there will be lots of pressure.
Episodes of financial tightening at the center and falling stock markets scare emerging market investors.
Who wants to be invested in Ecuador or Poland when the NY stock market crashes?
We had a taste of all this a few weeks back when the Fed first signaled its concern with growth and inflation prospects.
If a US stock market is widely interpreted as the end of a wonderful US expansion, the dollar will sell off.
That is not much of a problem for the US, but it definitely is in Europe where the strong dollar has worked as an employment program.
It is the same in Asia where the Yen is already overly strong for a half-dead economy.
The financial crises of the past 3 years may merely have been preludes.
The common mean point they should arrive at is democracy that delivers good government – and I mean “government,” not mushy “governance.”
Ronald Reagan famously said that “government is not the solution to our problem; government is the problem.”
He did not manufacture it; decades of laissez-faire theory and proselytizing did.
Following an explosion of government programs in the 1960’s, a belief developed in the minds of key American opinion leaders and policymakers that the best government is the least government.
Reagan captured this assumption well, recalling the sixth-century BC Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu’s famous words: “Governing a great nation is like cooking a small fish: too much handling will spoil it.”
The first was the belief that taxes are inherently bad, and thus that reducing them is the only solution to any public problem.
In California, many taxes were reduced by voter initiatives, demonstrating the damaging consequences of too much democracy.
For example, direct ballots on hot-button issues made prison sentencing mandatory, while simultaneously reducing taxes and funding for prisons.
In 1978, Proposition 13 capped California property taxes – the main source of public-school funding.
School revenues slumped, and from 1974 to 1979, California fell from ninth place to 44th among the 50 US states in per capita spending on public high schools, with California’s students soon slipping down the rankings as well.
Former US Federal Reserve chairman Alan Greenspan, the world’s leading financial regulator of the past quarter century, seemed to have little faith in either regulators or the need for regulation.
In an April 2008 article in The Financial Times, he wrote, “Bank loan officers, in my experience, know far more about the risks and workings of their counterparties than do bank regulators.”
Similarly, when asked whether he should regulate the market in derivatives, he replied, “These derivative transactions are transactions among professionals.”
Deep down, Greenspan must have believed that he was allowing Adam Smith’s “invisible hand” to deliver the public good.
“To widen the market and to narrow the competition, is always the interest of the dealers….The proposal of any new law or regulation of commerce which comes from this order, ought always to be listened to with great precaution, and ought never to be adopted till after having been long and carefully examined, not only with the most scrupulous, but with the most suspicious attention.
It comes from an order of men, whose interest is never exactly the same with that of the public, who have generally an interest to deceive and even oppress the public, and who accordingly have, upon many occasions, both deceived and oppressed it.”
Egypt’s problems are, of course, vastly different from those of California.
Despite the economic growth resulting from reforms undertaken by Hosni Mubarak’s regime in recent years, unemployment and poverty remained at high levels.
With a heavy and stifling bureaucracy and the prospect of a dynastic political succession, sheer lack of hope drove hundreds of thousands of Egyptians onto the streets.
But, with the dictator driven from power, Egyptians, too, must redefine government.
Despite their ideological differences, governments throughout the region have delivered rapid economic growth and improved their populations’ livelihoods.
Despite the fact that most leading East Asian policymakers were trained in American universities, none were seduced by Reagan’s belief that “government is the problem.”
Millennia-old cultural beliefs in East Asia underpin the view that if government is not part of the solution, no public good can be achieved.
Confucius, for example, said: “the man who uses his brain should govern; the man who uses his strength should be governed.”
The quality of American public services has deteriorated steadily over the past few decades, while that of Chinese public services has improved dramatically.
Ironically, the Chinese government has been strengthened without oppressing the growth and dynamism of the Chinese economy.
Of course, neither Egyptians nor Americans would ever allow a communist party to rule them.
But both must find the right principles of good government to resolve their very different public-policy challenges.
Abandoning the Reaganesque ideology that government is inherently bad is a necessary first step.
The bottom line is that the commodity in greatest demand by people all over the world is good government, which provides the best means of improving living standards, especially for those at the bottom.
Unfortunately, good government is in limited supply, in part because there is no global consensus about what constitutes it – to the detriment of people from Cairo to California and beyond.
The dominance of conservative Islam in the Middle East reflects a fundamental reality of Muslim society.
But this conservatism should not be mistaken for violent radicalism, as America, unfortunately, has done.
While conservatism may claim a majority of the “Arab street” (and the Persian street), this does not mean that violence and terrorism will inevitably rule the region.
A recent study published in Damascus by the Center of Islamic Studies pointed out that conservatives make up about 80% of the population of the Middle East’s Islamic societies.
Radicals can count on support from no more than 1% of the population.
In my view, these rough proportions have been stable throughout ten centuries of Islamic history, with slight differences.
Radicals first emerged as “Khawarij,” a fanatical group dating to the first century of Islam, which used accusations of blasphemy – and violence – to suppress even small differences of opinion.
Today’s conservatives are known among religious scholars as “People of the Letter” – those who adhere to the letter of the Islamic texts.
Reformists, as they are known today, are the equivalent of “People of Intellect.”
The difference between Muslim conservatives and reformists can be measured in two ways: their stance on the possibility of making personal judgments on religious matters (known in religious terms as “diligence”) and their attitude towards non-Muslims.
Conservatives believe that the revealed law was settled during the glorious days of Islam, and that individual interpretation should therefore be restricted.
As a result, they don’t look for new solutions to the problems that Muslims now face.
Banks and insurance companies are to be avoided, on the theory that their activities are usurious and thus prohibited.
For conservatives, Islamic law is based on the Koran and the verified sayings and doings (the Sunnah) of the Prophet Mohammad, as these are unanimously viewed by respected scholars.
Thus, conservatives reject democracy, because it subjects the will of God to popular opinion.
For them, the ultimate authority within a society is God’s revelation to the people.
Reformists, on the other hand, argue that individual judgment – diligence – is permissible, and that society is empowered to make choices based on contemporary needs, regardless of the opinions of previous religious scholars.
Reformists also take an expansive view of religious law (Sharia), incorporating ideas of public welfare within a continually developing legislative process.
Thus, for reformists, banks and insurance companies serve the welfare of society, and this takes precedence over a traditional reading of religious texts.
They also adopt a liberal attitude toward women’s head covering, as well as their political participation and travel, which should be determined individually.
Finally, reformists see no contradiction between democracy and Islamic teaching, though democracy does conflict with centuries of tradition governing how Muslims actually have been ruled.
As for attitudes toward non-Muslims (or non-practicing Muslims, for that matter), conservatives believe that the coming of Islam abrogated all other religions, while reformists believe that Islam completes other religions, but does not invalidate or disprove them.
Conservatives draw their proofs from the texts of the Koran, while reformists argue that the Koran mentions and recognizes both the Old and New Testaments.
In this manner, the reformists reject an Islamic monopoly on salvation, paradise, or the truth.
Conservatives, by contrast, are unyielding on this point, believing that there is but one path to God, and that salvation comes only through following Islamic teachings.
However, conservatives do not support the use of violence against non-Muslims.
On the contrary, the jurisprudential traditions of Islamic conservatism obligate Muslims to be just in their treatment of non-Muslims.
Thus, conservatives and reformists agree that the rights of others should be observed and preserved.
Although radicals represent no more than 1% of the Muslim population, their influence is based on the widening effects of their violence and their total rejection of compromise.
The radicals totally repudiate the Other, and do not see a place for the non-Muslim either in heaven or on Earth.
This stance sanctions the use of violence against the Other, whether Christian, Jew, or even other Muslims who do not share their beliefs.
And the extremism of radical culture is fueled by the many inequities and grievances that face the peoples of the Middle East.
Unfortunately, Iraq has become a breeding ground for radical Islam, owing to the brutality that the Iraqi people suffered under Saddam and now at the hands of the occupation forces.
Radicalism threatens any society where human dignity is lost and human rights mean nothing.
CARACAS – With the death of Hugo Chávez, Chávismo has lost its supremacy in Venezuela.
It does not matter that so-called Chávistas still control Venezuela’s parliament, 17 of 23 provincial governments, and all key state institutions, including the judiciary.
Nor does it matter that Chávez’s handpicked successor, Nicolás Maduro, has already assumed the presidency.
All of the signs point to the decline of Chávismo and to the end of Venezuela’s role as Latin America’s populist core.
Between last October’s presidential election and the one held last month, Chávismo lost almost 700,000 votes to Henrique Capriles’ Democratic Unity Roundtable – a shift that many, including Chávistas, attribute to “Maduro not being Chávez.”
This was the first presidential election in Venezuela that resulted in an almost even split among voters (and the outcome itself remains hotly contested).
If Venezuela continues along this path, Chávismo could not only lose its majority; it could collapse altogether.
Maduro’s poor performance reflects his squandering of Chávez’s electoral capital.
More important, it has deepened doubt that he will be able to perform two crucial functions of Chávismo, one related to Cuba and the other a more nationalist, less “anti-capitalist” purpose connected to unnamed yet powerful military figures.
Chávez’s connections with Cuba were an important factor in his choice of Maduro – a Marxist tutored by Fidel and Raúl Castro – as his heir.
More than a decade ago, Cuba saw in Chávez a way to drive Latin American populism in three main ways: establish North American imperialism and the local “oligarchies” as common enemies; lock in the support of the uneducated and deprived underclass; and erode the bases of viable opposition.
Curiously, many of the young democracies born after the ignominy of the right-wing military regimes of the 1970’s and 1980’s define themselves according to Cuba’s long-lasting communist dictatorship.
Tempted by the idea of endless re-election and absolute authority, Bolivia’s Evo Morales, Ecuador’s Rafael Correa, Nicaragua’s Daniel Ortega, and Argentina’s Cristina Fernández de Kirchner all indulge and support each other, with the economically and ideologically powerful Venezuela playing an important synthesizing role.
Given that Maduro cannot retain Chávez’s existing supporters, he is clearly not a candidate for regional leadership.
In fact, with Chávismo losing ground, Cuba will struggle to maintain its political influence in Venezuela – and thus the economic sinecures (including heavily subsidized oil) on which it depends.
Moreover, it will not be easy for Cuba to find a new leader to champion its absolutist ideology across Latin America.
Correa’s Ecuador lacks economic weight, and former Brazilian President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva is probably not interested, with Brazil’s growing economic and political clout having placed it out of Cuba’s reach.
With little hope of restoring Venezuela’s regional authority, Maduro will have to focus on safeguarding his tenuous leadership position at home.
The military embodies the most extreme institutional transformation that Chávez achieved in Venezuela.
Under his leadership, what was once an apolitical and non-deliberative institution – as is standard in a democracy – became the engine of Chávez’s “twenty-first-century socialism.”
Just as the Argentine working class formed Juan Perón’s electoral base 70 years ago, Venezuela’s armed forces served as Chávez’s most steadfast supporters, executing his authority throughout the country under the motto, “Country, socialism, or death.”
As Chávez’s health deteriorated, however, so did the motto’s significance.
But the overwhelming military presence in government ministries and institutions, state-owned companies, provincial governments, and private businesses remains intact.
Maduro seems to have the military’s support – at least for now.
Whether or not the partnership lasts will depend on how Maduro tackles Venezuela’s many problems, including high inflation, a soaring crime rate, pervasive corruption, economic stagnation, low productivity, supply shortages, capital flight, insufficient investment, weak institutions, and a lack of respect for the rule of law.
He will not be granted the 100-day “honeymoon” period that new governments typically receive to revise their predecessors’ policies and, presumably, to correct their errors, because his administration is a continuation of Chávez’s 14-year presidency.
Moreover, Maduro has already been the head of Venezuela’s executive for almost 180 days, first as Vice President, then as acting president, and now as the country’s elected leader.
Given this, Maduro cannot leave any issues unacknowledged or blame them on his predecessor.
At the same time, it will be difficult to address Venezuela’s problems effectively without Chávez’s electoral support, rhetorical talent, and charisma.
If Maduro fails to recognize this and act accordingly, he will lose the military’s support – and Venezuelans could lose their republic.
In recent months, Iraq's oil production has grown to more than two million barrels per day.
At this rate, current oil output and oil exports now exceed post-invasion predictions.
Experts had argued that funding shortages, lack of security, the problems of stabilizing a legitimate government, and technology shortfalls would severely limit Iraq's output.
Despite the odds, Iraq's daily output reached a post-invasion record of 2.5 million barrels in March.
Most significantly, the Bush administration gave Iraq $2.3 billion to restore its oil production.
After the invasion, no one expected Iraq to get loans, let alone outright grants.
Instead, $2.3 billion was invested directly into the Iraqi oil sector.
To protect the oil fields and other facilities, the Americans dedicated a massive, overwhelming force of soldiers and private contractors.
On the technical side, the Bush administration hired the world's best oil service companies to revamp Iraq's technologically challenged oil fields.
They still have a long way to go, but significant improvements are already evident.
Moreover, the war didn't change the quality of Iraqi fields, which are still among the richest in the world and can produce oil with relatively little effort and investment.
Finally, high oil prices in the past 12 months provided an unexpectedly large windfall to the Iraqi budget, allowing for the financing of other sectors without slighting the oil industry.
High prices also enabled the Coalition Provisional Authority to add even more private security personnel to protect refineries and pipelines.
Granting Iraq the money to restore its oil industry was one of the best post-war decisions that the Bush administration has made.
The money allowed Iraq to begin to address security, production, and technology issues throughout its oil system.
But the question remains: will output growth continue following the transfer of sovereignty to an Iraqi government at the end of June?
Despite massive injections of funds and unprecedented security, insurgents have still managed to halt or reduce oil production and exports several times since the invasion.
The bombing of a pipeline or other oil facility somewhere in Iraq remains almost a daily occurrence, and the transfer of power has not reduced these attacks so far.
Like the Bush administration and Saddam himself, the insurgents understand that whoever controls Iraqi oil controls Iraq's destiny.
The new Iraqi government, even supported by US military might, will simply not be able to guarantee a predictable flow of oil, and output will remain quite volatile.
At the same time, maintaining the flow of funds into the Iraqi oil sector is essential, not only for its growth, but for its very survival.
Under even the best circumstances for Iraq, with oil prices remaining high, the funds available to maintain and modernize the oil industry are limited.
Only Saudi Arabia can manage the global output of oil in such a way that will make room for Iraqi oil and keep prices high.
In contrast, only Saudi Arabia can flood the market and reduce prices far below their current level.
A decline in oil revenues could be devastating to the fledgling Iraqi government.
Current oil revenues are barely enough to cover state expenses, let alone pay for reconstruction, debt, and war reparations.
Even if President Bush wins reelection, it is highly unlikely that the US will make another outright grant to a sovereign Iraq.
Theoretically, international loans could be an alternative, but who would lend to an unstable government, let alone a government whose legitimacy has not been fully established?
The new government will have to make do and chart a slow path for its oil recovery, just as Saddam's regime did.
At the same time, the logic of renewed American support for the Iraqi oil industry remains powerful.
Saddam's regime caused most of the volatility in the oil market in the last 30 years.
In fact, every peak in oil prices since 1973 was caused by an event related to Iraq.
Unfortunately, Iraq appears set to continue to be a major source of high oil prices, owing to highly erratic output.
For the foreseeable future, one of the principal outcomes of the invasion of Iraq will be greater volatility and thus higher prices.
San Francisco – From Adam Smith (1776) until 1950 or so, capital was considered by economists to be absolutely essential for economic growth.
“Security of property and tolerable administration of justice,” as Smith put it.
If these fundamental institutions were right, then landlords, merchants, and manufacturers would invest and improve.
In investing and improving, they would add to the capital stock: “In all countries where there is a tolerable security [of property], every man of common understanding will endeavor to employ whatever [capital] stock he can command, in procuring either present enjoyment or future profit...
A man must be perfectly crazy, who, where there is a tolerable security, does not employ all the stock which he commands, whether it be his own, or borrowed of other people...”
A larger capital stock would mean thicker markets, a finer division of labor, and a more productive economy.
A highly productive society based on a sophisticated division of labor was how you secured “the wealth of nations.”
Reverse the process, however, and you get the poverty of nations, which Smith believed he saw in the Asia of his time.
For Smith and his successors over the first 175 years, any episode of sustained economic growth overwhelmingly required investment capital.
We economists were by and large capital boosters, and our magic formula for economic development was saving, investment, thrift, and wealth accumulation.
The last and fullest expression of this line of thought comes at the end of the 1950’s with W.W. Rostow’s book The Stages of Economic Growth .
Then Robert Solow and Moses Abramovitz challenged this near-consensus.
They calculated that 75% to 80% of economic growth did not come from increasing the capital-output ratio – at least not if the private marginal product of capital was taken as an indicator of the social marginal product.
Instead, the keys to growth and development appeared to lie beyond an increase in capital intensity as measured by capital-output ratios: skills, education, technology broadly understood, and improvements in organizational management.
In the framework developed by the development economist Dani Rodrik, a shortage of capital can be a binding “growth constraint”: the place where “the biggest bang for the [policy] reform buck can be obtained.”
And even when other factors constrain growth more, they cannot be changed without changing the shape and form of the economy’s capital stock.
Indeed, high investment serves as a sign that other binding constraints to growth are absent, implying prosperity and that things are going right.
The problem is that for poor economies, raising the capital needed to relax binding growth constraints is difficult.
That’s why the world took the neo-liberal bet in the 1990’s: international capital mobility would come to the rescue by relaxing capital constraints where they were binding, and by reducing the scope for corruption and rent-seeking, which was often a more significant binding growth constraint.
The hope was that, like the pre-1913 era of British overseas investment, which financed a huge amount of industrialization in the resource-rich, temperate periphery of the world economy, net capital outflows from the industrial core would finance much late twentieth and twenty-first century industrialization.
But we all know the outcome: while international capital flows soared, the large net flow of capital from rich to poor countries simply never materialized.
In fact, the principal outcome was an enormous flow of capital from the periphery to the rich core.
For most of the past generation, and looking into the future, the message of the market is that the benefits of international capital mobility do not include a relaxation of the capital constraint, and thus an acceleration of growth in the global periphery.
The reason is not that the periphery offers an attractive labor force from which capital profits, but rather that the core – especially the United States – offers a form of protection for capital against unanticipated political disturbances.
But even though net international capital flows are going the wrong way, there are still substantial gross capital flows outward from the world economy’s core to its periphery.
And we can hope that these capital flows will carry with them the institutions and managerial expertise that have made the core so wealthy.
Nevertheless, a dispassionate observer might point out that for someone with limited resources and opportunities for policy reform to keep betting double-or-nothing on neo-liberalism is a strategy that has a well-deserved name: “Gambler’s Ruin.”
TOKYO – On May 1, the Shanghai Expo began, illuminated by a huge fireworks display.
In 1970, Japan celebrated its own tremendous postwar economic growth with the Osaka Expo, as well as by launching the Bullet Train.
The world watches and wonders whether China will follow Japan’s path and emerge as a fully modern yet peacefully inclined country.
China’s willingness to demonstrate its new might is not confined to land; on the contrary, China’s maritime ambitions have no end in sight.
Indeed, when Admiral Timothy J. Keating, the commander of the United States Navy’s Pacific fleet, visited China in 2007, a high-ranking Chinese naval officer proposed that the two countries demarcate a “zone of control” at Hawaii, defining the limits of US naval influence and the beginning of China’s maritime sphere.
The Chinese navy, it is now believed, is trying to achieve that very aim.
On April 8, a helicopter from a Chinese naval vessel operating in international waters south of Okinawa came within 90 meters of a Japanese Self-Defense Force escort ship – so close that a gun-wielding Chinese soldier was clearly visible.
As if demonstrating its intention to ignore the protest, on April 21 Chinese Navy vessels sailed northward, between Okinawa and the Miyako islands, and conducted a large-scale exercise.
Although reconnaissance flights by Russia’s Air Force frequently occur in Japan’s northern skies, both countries understand the need for caution in their actions.
The Japanese and Chinese militaries, however, do not have sufficient ties to create confidence that caution will prevail.
To prevent an accident from inciting a volatile incident, it is imperative that the two sides develop a deeper bilateral military dialogue.
Moreover, Japan’s government has encouraged Chinese regional ambitions by embracing an anti-American attitude similar to the administration of South Korea’s former president, Roh Moo-hyun.
By promising in last summer’s election campaign to expel America’s bases on Okinawa, Prime Minister Yukio Hatoyama put himself in a bind.
It now appears that he wants to backtrack on his promise, but massive protests are inhibiting him from doing so.
Sensing a widening gulf between Japan and the US, the Chinese Navy is demonstrating its growing might in the seas around Japan – and asserting its aspiration to replace the US as the Pacific’s dominant naval power.
There is a precedent for this: when the US closed Subic Bay Naval Base and Clark Air Force Base in the Philippines, the Chinese military immediately stepped up its activity around the Spratly Islands, which are recognized as Filipino territory but which China is claiming vehemently.
China’s struggle for mastery in the Pacific is now raising fears in Japan.
South of Okinawa is Yonaguni Island, with a population of just 1,800 and visible from Taiwan on a clear day.
Within Japan, there is growing controversy over the Hatoyama government’s push for a law that would allow particular foreign residents on the island to vote in local elections.
The inhabitants of Yonaguni strongly oppose the law, not because they are exclusionary, but because they believe that they are protecting a sensitive border.
Because a mere 137 votes can get a town council member elected, a large number of foreigners with a particular interest in moving onto the island could nominate a winning candidate.
The worry is that such a council could legislate in ways “friendly” to neighboring states, which might compromise Japan’s national security dramatically.
Even Hatoyama’s defense minister, Toshimi Kitazawa, who had been prone to naïve remarks on the issue, appears to have come to his senses.
He is now calling for the construction of a Self-Defense Force base on Yonaguni.
But the situation on the island demonstrates anew that China is prepared to take advantage of every misstep that the gaffe-prone Hatoyama government makes.
And it is not just the waters near Japan that should concern Hatoyama, for the Chinese Navy is not only eyeing the Pacific, but also steering toward South Asia, the Indian Ocean, the Middle East, and Africa.
Indeed, the growing contest between India and China is not only military in nature, but also concerns the acquisition of natural resources.
By controlling the sea lanes, China hopes to gain leverage over India’s capacity for economic growth.
Although Chinese officials say that the 2010 military budget has been restrained, and will grow by only 7.5%, China’s military expenditures already exceeds those of Japan by 15%.
In fact, China probably limited the increase this year after recognizing that the international community is becoming alarmed by the steep upward trajectory of its military build-up.
But there remain doubts about the true level of China’s military spending, owing to a pronounced lack of transparency in the budget process.
It remains unclear, for example, whether the research and development costs for an aircraft carrier are included.
History has repeatedly demonstrated that such ambiguity, particular if practiced by a rising power, can spark an arms race.
The secretive naval build-up of Kaiser Wilhelm II’s Germany, for example, helped incite World War I. US President John F. Kennedy’s belief that a “missile gap” existed in the Soviet Union’s favor inspired the production of multiple-warhead nuclear missiles, accelerating the nuclear arms race at the height of the Cold War.
China claims that it is entitled to play a role in setting the rules that govern the international system.
But until China acts with greater sincerity and transparency in eliminating the international community’s concerns, it runs the risk that its neighbors will not only suspect its efforts in the international arena, but take active countermeasures to defend their security.
PARIS – The rise of emerging economies worldwide has generated much optimism, in terms not only of economic development, but also of global cooperation.
But the shift to a multipolar world order has not bolstered multilateralism.
In fact, the opposite is true: the logic of national sovereignty has staged a comeback, with major economies consistently undermining cooperation on issues ranging from security to trade to climate change.
Consider the muddle in the United Nations Security Council over Syria’s civil war.
Just two years ago, the Council approved a resolution authorizing a military intervention in Libya – the first resolution to implement the “responsibility to protect” (R2P) principle, which the general assembly adopted unanimously in 2005.
But the emerging powers soon came to believe that the West had used the protection of Libya’s civilian population as a pretext for regime change (though, realistically, it would have been impossible to protect the population without toppling Muammar el-Qaddafi’s government).
Now, these countries are largely rejecting R2P, viewing it as a device employed by Western governments to legitimize their attempts to infringe upon national sovereignty.
Brazil has attempted to address the issue by crafting a resolution that would decouple the R2P mandate from the use of force – effectively eliminating the possibility that the doctrine could be applied.
For their part, Russia and China have blocked three resolutions condemning the Syrian regime, and Russia has worked hard – with evident success – to derail any military intervention in Syria.
In this sense, Russia and China now exercise de facto control over the formal international legality of the use of force.
To be sure, many countries ­now believe that the West is going too far in challenging state sovereignty, with even European countries like Germany recoiling at the prospect of military confrontation.
At the G-20 summit in early September, for example, US President Barack Obama struggled to convince ten states to sign a declaration on Syria that did not even mention the use of force.
Only the US, the United Kingdom, and France remain willing to use force if it is deemed necessary.
But viewing intervention in Syria within the paradigm of Western messianism is a mistake.
After all, in Syria, as in Libya, the forces challenging the government are not a creature of Western manipulation.
The legal basis for military intervention may be weak, but Syria is no Iraq, either.
Security is not the only area where sovereignty concerns have superseded multilateralism.
In 2008, the US abandoned its commitment to the World Trade Organization’s Doha Round of global trade negotiations.
While the decision followed a technical disagreement with India, it was driven largely by the belief that any agreement would benefit China more than the US.
Given that the Doha Round has failed to address the main problems that the US and Europe have encountered in trade relations with China – non-compliance with intellectual-property rules, subsidies for state-owned enterprises, closed government-procurement markets, and limits on access to the services market – both are now emphasizing bilateral trade agreements.
But, while the world may be happy to pretend that bilateral cooperation will revitalize multilateralism, nobody should be fooled.
The WTO will survive, but its centrality in the trade system is rapidly diminishing.
Even cooperation on climate change is crumbling, with the US and China rejecting the multilateral, top-down approach to policymaking.
This implies the end of the Kyoto Protocol model, which, like the Doha model, is based on a detailed agenda, established according to specific and ambitious targets, with all relevant actors then compelled to negotiate each topic.
Rather than being subject to an internationally agreed standard, the US and China want the fight against climate change to begin with countries’ individual commitments.
But this new, bottom-up framework, in which states determine the conditions for a multilateral agreement, lacks an authority to establish standards.
Multilateralism requires minimal consensus on global rules and norms among all major powers.
The greater the number of countries that have the power to block or veto international initiatives, the more difficult multilateralism becomes – and the less motivated dominant countries are to cooperate.
In the emerging multipolar world, characterized by sovereignty concerns and strategic competition, progress toward resolving global issues will be more difficult than ever – with potentially devastating consequences.
CHICAGO – In an interesting recent book, What Money Can’t Buy: The Moral Limits of the Market, the Harvard philosopher Michael Sandel points to the range of things that money can buy in modern societies and gently tries to stoke our outrage at the market’s growing dominance.
While Sandel worries about the corrupting nature of some monetized transactions (do kids really develop a love of reading if they are bribed to read books?), he is also concerned about unequal access to money, which makes trades using money inherently unequal.
More generally, he fears that the expansion of anonymous monetary exchange erodes social cohesion, and argues for reducing money’s role in society.
Sandel’s concerns are not entirely new, but his examples are worth reflecting upon.
In the United States, some companies pay the unemployed to stand in line for free public tickets to congressional hearings.
They then sell the tickets to lobbyists and corporate lawyers who have a business interest in the hearing but are too busy to stand in line.
We cannot accommodate everyone in the room who might have an interest in a particularly important hearing.
We can either allow people to use their time (standing in line) to bid for seats, or we can auction seats for money.
The former seems fairer, because all citizens seemingly start with equal endowments of time.
But is a single mother with a high-pressure job and three young children as equally endowed with spare time as a student on summer vacation?
And is society better off if she, the chief legal counsel for a large corporation, spends much of her time standing in line?
Whether it is better to sell entry tickets for time or for money thus depends on what we hope to achieve.
If we want to increase society’s productive efficiency, people’s willingness to pay with money is a reasonable indicator of how much they will gain if they have access to the hearing.
Auctioning seats for money makes sense – the lawyer contributes more to society by preparing briefs than by standing in line.
On the other hand, if it is important that young, impressionable citizens see how their democracy works, and that we build social solidarity by making corporate executives stand in line with jobless teenagers, it makes sense to force people to bid with their time and to make entry tickets non-transferable.
But if we think that both objectives – efficiency and solidarity – should play some role, perhaps we should turn a blind eye to hiring the unemployed to stand in line in lieu of busy lawyers, so long as they do not corner all of the seats.
Yet we celebrate the kindness of a stranger who donates a kidney to a young child.
So, clearly, it is not the transfer of the organ that outrages us – we do not think that the donor is misinformed about the value of a kidney or is being fooled into parting with it.
Nor, I think, do we have concerns about the scruples of the person selling the organ – after all, they are parting irreversibly with something that is dear to them for a price that few of us would accept.
I think part of our discomfort has to do with the circumstances in which the transaction takes place.
What kind of society do we live in if people have to sell their organs to survive?
But, while a ban on organ sales may make us feel better, does it really make society better off?
Possibly, if it makes society work harder to ensure that people are never driven to the circumstances that would make them contemplate selling a vital organ.
But possibly not, if it allows society to ignore the underlying problem, either moving the trade underground, or forcing people in such circumstances to resort to worse remedies.
Then again, part of our unease probably has to do with what we perceive as an unequal exchange.
The buyer is giving up only money – perhaps earned on a lucky stock trade or at an overpaid job.
If that money had been earned by selling a portion of a lung, or represented savings painfully accumulated during years of backbreaking work, we might consider the exchange more equal.
I need know nothing about the dollar bill I receive to be able to use it.
But, because money’s anonymity obscures its provenance, it may be socially less acceptable as a medium of payment for some objects.
In both examples – congressional tickets and organ sales – Sandel suggests reducing money’s role.
So, perhaps the more important message is that society’s tolerance for monetization is proportional to the legitimacy accorded to the distribution of money.
The more people believe that it is the hardworking and the deserving who have money, the more they are willing to tolerate transactions for money (though some transactions remain beyond the pale).
But if people believe that the moneyed are primarily those who are well connected or crooked, their tolerance for monetary transactions falls.
Rather than focusing on prohibiting monetary transactions, perhaps a more important lesson imparted by Sandel’s examples is that we should work continuously to improve the perceived legitimacy of money’s distribution.
It almost seems as if Japan is bent on self-isolation in Asia.
After a few months during which Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi ostensibly sought to improve his country’s relations with China, his fifth visit to the controversial Yasukuni Shrine has again raised tempers.
China and South Korea both cancelled meetings of their foreign ministers with their Japanese counterpart.
Once again, Japan has missed a chance to rebuild trust in a part of the world where, in the absence of cooperative international institutions, trust is all there is.
Why does Japan still not understand that the way it treats its history echoes across every part of Asia that Japan’s military occupied in the first part of the 20th century?
As Japan’s government never ceases to point out, the Yasukuni shrine, built in 1869, venerates the 2.5 million Japanese who have died for their country, not just the 14 judged as war criminals after WWII.
But, while many Japanese feel (with some justification) that South Korea and, in particular, China, exploit the Yasukuni issue to reduce Japan’s influence in the region and to pander to their publics’ strong nationalism, they are missing the point.
Indeed, domestic politicking seems to be at least as important to Japan’s leaders as to South Koreas’s or China’s.
Koizumi’s visit to the shrine, officially presented as that of a private citizen, was intended to impress the Japanese public, regardless of its effects abroad.
But the country now is isolated, which affects the whole fabric of stability in the region.
Japan’s diplomatic isolation strengthens those in the Chinese leadership who have long sought to marginalize what is economically and militarily still Asia’s most powerful nation, while sucking other states in the region deeper into China’s shadow.
Japan’s isolation also increases its dependency on its only ally, the United States, and undermines the fragile chance of developing a framework in Asia to address future regional crises in a spirit of cooperation rather than confrontation and rivalry.
Because Japan’s isolation is a matter not only for the Japanese, it must be a matter for Western policy.
The US administration, fashionably worried over China’s growing regional influence, seems quite happy with a closely-tied Japan that could help balance China.
But this is obviously a shortsighted approach, for a Japan that is tied exclusively to America will lose, not gain, against China in the region, thus making the balancing act even harder.
The Europeans have no Japan policy at all, not even a shortsighted one.
Fixated on the promise of an ever growing Chinese market, they give little thought to the stability of the region.
They seem to think of the powers in the region as unconnected islands, and of their own behavior towards one as devoid of political consequence for the others.
When the European Union last year considered lifting its symbolic arms embargo against China, none of the governments driving the proposal bothered to consider that this, too, would be symbolic, sending a message all over Asia that Europe was putting its political weight behind Chinese regional policies.
Japanese demands to reconsider fell on deaf ears, and the initiative was put on ice only when US congressmen threatened economic repercussions and China increased pressure on Taiwan.
Instead of exploiting Japan as a regional aircraft carrier, as the US tries to do, or neglecting her politically, as Europeans do, both need to work out a new, strategic approach – if possible, jointly.
The aim must be to prevent a clash of nationalisms and encourage a cooperative framework in which the region’s major countries interact and develop respect for each other’s interests.
Such a framework can emerge in Asia only with Japan’s active involvement, not on the basis of her isolation.
Japan’s leaders must recognize that the mindlessness with which they still treat the sensitivities of societies that suffered from Japanese imperialism in the twentieth century is as morally deaf as it is strategically damaging.
But this process of realization is more likely to succeed if Japan does not feel it stands with its back against a wall.
Friends from abroad, therefore, can assist this process by ensuring that Japan does not to feel alone.
Far from endorsing Japanese lack of sensitivity, active Western political engagement – for its own credibility in Asia – must convey that Japan’s future depends on gaining the trust of the region.
After all, Japan was a political ally throughout the half-century of the Cold War.
In a part of the world where democracy is gradually advancing, Japan can point to firm democratic traditions and institutions.
Its economic clout remains formidable, and its commercial and cultural ties to the West are broad and varied.
Japan may have shied away for decades from sharing the task of maintaining international order, but a new awareness of international responsibility is steadily emerging.
For those who want a stable Asia, the interest in establishing close links with Japan should be obvious.
This should not come at the expense of similar links with others, such as China and India, but these ties must not be acquired at the price of isolating Japan.
PARIS – French President Emmanuel Macron has framed the European Parliament election in May 2019 as a battle not between the traditional right and left, but between populists and pro-European progressives like himself.
Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras recently adopted similar rhetoric, declaring that “all progressive, democratic, and pro-European forces have a duty to stand side by side on the same side of history.”
Would such a fundamental Europe-wide political shift – much like the one in France that brought Macron to power last year – actually come to pass?
The European People’s Party (EPP) on the right and the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats (S&D) on the left have long shared control of the European Parliament, where they have governed by compromise.
But, over time, this has produced a kind of political homogenization in Europe, leading to mass abstentionism.
Those who do vote increasingly choose anti-establishment parties that often espouse extreme views.
As a result, whereas the EPP and S&D controlled 61% of the European Parliament in 2009, they won only 54% of the vote in 2014, meaning that the body was very nearly dominated by extremist parties.
The 2019 election is likely to produce even more losses for the establishment parties, which are expected to win only 45% of seats.
At this stage, it is doubtful that anyone would consider running a campaign on the basis of left-right divisions – not least because of deep rifts within the parties themselves.
On the right, the EPP is divided between pro-European liberals and conservative Euroskeptics, despite endorsing Manfred Weber of Germany’s Christian Social Union as the EPP Spitzenkandidat.
At the recent EPP Congress in Helsinki, European Council President Donald Tusk was explicit: breaching the rule of law is incompatible with belonging to the Christian Democrat family – a message obviously aimed at Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán.
In the European Parliament, the EPP even voted in favor of invoking Article 7 of the Treaty of Lisbon against Hungary, a move that would impose sanctions in response to the Orbán government’s systematic violations of judicial independence, freedom of speech, and the rights of minorities and migrants.
But the EPP’s vote was largely motivated by its desire to preserve its chances of remaining the largest EU party and ensuring that Weber becomes the next European Commission leader.
More broadly, strong political pressure forced the EPP’s hand; under different circumstances, the party probably would have been happy to allow Orbán to continue breaching democratic norms unchecked, in order to preserve its own hegemony in the EU Parliament.
But in refusing to clarify its position on Orbán or expel him, the EPP is taking an enormous risk.
If the European Council chooses Weber as the next European Commission president, both social democrats and liberals in the European Parliament could refuse to vote for a candidate from a party that keeps Orbán in its ranks.
That is why Macron, who has an interest in dividing the EPP and luring its liberal wing to join him, opposes the Spitzenkandidat system.
First, the European Council could choose an EPP candidate who is less ambiguous on Hungary.
Brexit chief negotiator Michel Barnier could be a serious substitute for Weber – probably the only one within the EPP.
The second alternative would be to endorse the Dutch Labour Party’s Frans Timmermans, who took a very strong position against Orbán and is acceptable to German Chancellor Angela Merkel and EPP liberals.
But if the European Council is deadlocked, and the European Parliament opposes her choice, she could endorse another candidate.
The decline of the S&D also makes it implausible that Weber could get their support.
The third option could be a candidate endorsed by the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe (ALDE), such as Margrethe Vestager, the EU competition commissioner.
Some observers argue that the Danish government will never propose Vestager as their candidate.
But Macron, who strongly supports Vestager, could endorse her as the French candidate – an unprecedented move that would accelerate the Europeanization of continental politics.
Overall, populist forces could well secure a majority in the European Parliament, though they will not operate as a unified force under a single political banner.
In such a scenario, Macron would need to build political coalitions with either the EPP or the S&D, whose views largely align with his vision for EU – and, more important, eurozone – reform.
In fact, like the rule of law, eurozone reform is a key fault line along which political alliances will be established.
Macron is already marshaling support among center-right leaders in Spain and the Netherlands, who are more sympathetic to his vision for European integration.
He has established a good rapport with Dutch Prime Minister Mark Rutte, even though Rutte opposes the eurozone reforms Macron advocates.
First, Europe’s leaders will have to address the need to reinforce the EU’s external frontiers, especially through the long-overdue deployment of a European border patrol.
Such a proposal will undoubtedly rile nationalist populists, who will oppose the deployment of a European force, even as they rail against migration.
Second, Europe’s leaders will need to commit to combating tax evasion and avoidance by major companies, especially the big tech firms.
This is a high-stakes issue, as it will determine the capacity of states to remain fiscally solvent in increasingly digital economies.
Some progress has already been made on this front, thanks largely to Vestager.
But stronger action is needed, not least because EU countries continue to grant corporate tax abatements.
And with Germany reconsidering its support for a French-backed plan to tax the revenue of large technology companies at the EU level, further progress is far from guaranteed.
Perhaps Europe’s ongoing political realignment will enable the realization of Macron’s vision of a stronger, more integrated Europe.
While recent challenges – not least Italy’s budget battle with the European Commission – indicate that such an outcome is far from assured, it remains the most credible counterweight to the rise of populism.
NEW YORK – The drama of Donald Trump’s presidency has centered around whether an extremist president would be able to carry out an extremist policy agenda against the will of the majority of Americans.
So far the answer has been no, and the midterm elections make it far less likely.
Yet Trump’s rising frustrations could push him over the edge psychologically, with potentially harrowing consequences for American democracy and the world.
The public opposed last year’s Republican-backed corporate tax cut, Trump’s effort to repeal the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), his proposed border wall with Mexico, the decision to withdraw from the Iran nuclear agreement, and the imposition of tariff increases on China, Europe, and others.
At the same time, contrary to Trump’s relentless promotion of fossil fuels (coal, oil, and gas), the public favors investments in renewable energy and remaining in the Paris climate agreement.
The first has been to rely on the Republican majorities in the two houses of Congress to pass legislation in the face of strong popular opposition.
That approach succeeded once, with the 2017 corporate tax cut, because big Republican donors insisted on the measure, but it failed with Trump’s attempt to repeal Obamacare, as three Republican senators balked.
Here the courts have repeatedly intervened, most recently within days of the election, when a federal district court halted work on the Keystone XL Pipeline, a project strongly opposed by environmentalists, on the grounds that the Trump administration had failed to present a “reasoned explanation” for its actions.
Trump repeatedly and dangerously oversteps his authority, and the courts keep pushing back.
Yet, despite his frequent rallies, or perhaps because of them and their incendiary vulgarity, Trump’s disapproval rating has exceeded his approval rating since the earliest days of his administration.
His current overall disapproval rating is 54%, versus 40% approval, with strong approval from around 25% of the public.
In the midterm elections, which Trump himself described as a referendum on his presidency, the Democratic candidates for both the House and Senate vastly outpolled their Republican opponents.
In the House races, Democrats received 53,314,159 votes nationally, compared with 48,439,810 for Republicans.
In the Senate races, Democrats outpolled Republicans by 47,537,699 votes to 34,280,990.
Summing up votes by party for the three recent election cycles (2014, 2016, and 2018), Democratic Senate candidates outpolled Republican candidates by roughly 120 million to 100 million.
Nonetheless, the Republicans hold a slight majority in the Senate, where each state is represented by two senators, regardless of the size of its population, because they tend to win their seats in less populous states, whereas Democrats prevail in the major coastal and Midwestern states.
Wyoming, for example, elects two Republican senators to represent its nearly 580,000 residents, while California’s more than 39 million residents elect two Democratic senators.
Without control of the House, however, Trump will no longer be able to enact any unpopular legislation.
On the economic front, Trump’s trade policies will become even less popular in the months ahead as the American economy cools from the “sugar high” of the corporate tax cut, as growing uncertainty about global trade policy hamstrings business investment, and as both the budget deficit and interest rates rise.
Trump’s phony national-security justifications for raising tariffs will also be challenged politically and perhaps in the courts.
True, Trump will be able to continue appointing conservative federal judges and most likely win their confirmation in the Republican-majority Senate.
And on issues of war and peace, Trump will operate with terrifyingly little oversight by Congress or the public, an affliction of the US political system since World War II.
Trump, like his recent predecessors, will most likely keep America mired in wars in the Middle East and Africa, despite the lack of significant public understanding or support.
Nonetheless, there are three further reasons to believe that Trump’s hold on power will weaken significantly in the coming months.
First, Special Counsel Robert Mueller may very well document serious malfeasance by Trump, his family members, and/or his close advisers.
Second, the House Democrats will begin to investigate Trump’s taxes and personal business dealings, including through congressional subpoenas.
There are strong reasons to believe that Trump has committed serious tax evasion (as the New York Times recently outlined) and has illegally enriched his family as president (a lawsuit that the courts have allowed to proceed alleges violations of the emoluments clause of the Constitution).
Trump is likely to ignore or fight the subpoenas, setting the stage for a major political crisis.
He suffers from what author Ian Hughes has recently called “a disordered mind,” filled with hate, paranoia, and narcissism.
According to two close observers of Trump, the president’s grip on reality “will likely continue to diminish” in the face of growing political obstacles, investigations into his taxes and business dealings, Mueller’s findings, and an energized political opposition.
We may already be seeing that in Trump’s erratic and aggressive behavior since the election.
As Trump’s political position weakens and the obstacles facing him grow, his mental instability will pose an ever-greater danger.
He could explode in rage, fire Mueller, and perhaps try to launch a war or claim emergency powers in order to restore his authority.
We have not yet seen Trump in full fury, but may do so soon, as his room for maneuver continues to narrow.
In that case, much will depend on the performance of America’s constitutional order.
NEW YORK – Now that US President Donald Trump has been in office for six months, we can more confidently assess the prospects for the US economy and economic policymaking under his administration.
The main puzzle is the disconnect between the performance of financial markets and the real.
While stock markets continue to reach new highs, the US economy grew at an average rate of just 2% in the first half of 2017 – slower growth than under President Barack Obama – and is not expected to perform much better for the rest of the year.
Stock-market investors continue to hold out hope that Trump can push through policies to stimulate growth and increase corporate profits.
Moreover, sluggish wage growth implies that inflation is not reaching the US Federal Reserve’s target rate, which means that the Fed will have to normalize interest rates more slowly than expected.
Lower long-term interest rates and a weaker dollar are good news for US stock markets, and Trump’s pro-business agenda is still good for individual stocks in principle, even if the air has been let out of the so-called Trump reflation trade.
And there is now less reason to worry that a massive fiscal-stimulus program will push up the dollar and force the Fed to raise rates.
In view of the Trump administration’s political ineffectiveness, it is safe to assume that if there is any stimulus at all, it will be smaller than expected.
The administration’s inability to execute on the economic-policy front is unlikely to change.
Congressional Republicans’ attempts to replace the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) have failed, not least because moderate Republicans refused to vote for a bill that would deprive some 20 million Americans of their health insurance.
The Trump administration is now moving on to tax reform, which will be just as hard, if not harder, to enact.
Earlier tax-reform proposals had anticipated savings from the repeal of Obamacare, and from a proposed “border adjustment tax” that has since been abandoned.
Because the US Senate’s budget-reconciliation rules require all tax cuts to be revenue-neutral after ten years, Republicans will either have to cut tax rates by far less than they had originally intended, or settle for temporary and limited tax cuts that aren’t paid for.
To benefit American workers and spur economic growth, tax reforms need to increase the burden on the rich, and provide relief to workers and the middle class.
But Trump’s proposals would do the opposite: depending on which plan you look at, 80-90% of the benefits would go to the top 10% of the income distribution.
More to the point, US corporations aren’t hoarding trillions of dollars in cash and refusing to make capital investments because the tax rate is too high, as Trump and congressional Republicans claim.
Rather, firms are less inclined to invest because slow wage growth is depressing consumption, and thus overall economic growth.
Beyond tax reform, Trump’s plan to stimulate short-term growth through $1 trillion in infrastructure spending is still not on the horizon.
And, instead of direct government investment of that amount, the administration wants to provide modest tax incentives for the private sector to spearhead various projects.
Unfortunately, it will take more than tax breaks to bring large infrastructure projects from start to finish, and “shovel-ready” projects are few and far between.
The good news is that the administration has not pursued radically protectionist policies, such as branding countries as currency manipulators, introducing across-the-board tariffs, or pushing for the border adjustment tax.
The bad news is that Trump is sticking to his “buy American, hire American” credo, and his protectionist gestures will hurt growth more than they save jobs.
He has already abandoned the Trans-Pacific Partnership and negotiations for the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership with the European Union.
He is renegotiating the North American Free Trade Agreement, and he may try to renegotiate other free-trade agreements, such as the bilateral deal with South Korea.
And he could still start a trade war with China by introducing tariffs on steel and other products – especially now that China has been uncooperative in responding to North Korea’s escalating nuclear threat.
In addition to barring visitors from six predominantly Muslim countries, the administration is intent on restricting migration for high-skill workers, and is ramping up deportations of undocumented immigrants.
This, along with the much-ballyhooed border wall, will cut future labor supply, and thus economic growth, especially as the American population continues to age and drop out of the labor force.
Lastly, Trump’s deregulation agenda will not boost economic growth, and may actually weaken it over time.
If financial regulations are loosened too much, the result could be another asset and credit bubble, and even another financial crisis and recession.
Meanwhile, Trump’s decision to withdraw from the Paris climate agreement, combined with a rollback of environmental regulations, will lead to ecological degradation and slower growth in green-economy industries such as solar power.
And weaker labor protections will further reduce workers’ bargaining power, thus holding down wage growth and overall consumption.
Yes, inflation is low, and corporate profits and stock markets are soaring.
High market valuations that are fueled by liquidity and irrational exuberance do not reflect fundamental economic realities.
BEIJING – A common sentiment among investors in China is that the best way to make money is to trade frequently, lest you end up holding the short straw.
But, in my experience, buying and holding great businesses is the only way to achieve excellent returns.
Other investors often tell me that they would like to invest for the long term, but that their fiduciary duty to their clients bars them from doing so.
Great long-term investments are simple in theory, but difficult to execute; they will undoubtedly test your patience and resolve, especially if you face steep interim losses.
That is why a successful long-term strategy requires the backing of investment partners who trust you and are willing to be patient.
Fund managers who are under constant pressure to post profits or defend short-term results cannot afford to invest with entrepreneurs building businesses that are optimized for the next ten years, rather than for the next quarter.
My firm’s relationship with the founders of the detergent maker Blue Moon, Luo Qiuping and Pan Dong, exemplifies this idea.
Their business was growing organically, and Luo and Pan were not looking for investors.
But we kept in touch with them, often sharing our thoughts on the global household/personal-care industry.
Then, in 2008, the company had a small breakthrough with a new type of liquid clothing detergent.
At the time, multinationals had a big presence in the Chinese powder-detergent market.
Liquid detergents were a premium product, and the Chinese were thought to be too cost-conscious to use them.
But we believed that Blue Moon had a window of opportunity to seize the liquid-detergent market in China.
Globally, this market stood at nearly $20 billion; it seemed inconceivable that the rise of the Chinese consumer would not add to this number.
Encouraged by our discussions, Blue Moon made a significant investment in liquid detergents, spending heavily on manufacturing, marketing, and distribution.
The move transformed a small firm with steady profits into a loss-making enterprise with the potential to become a multibillion-dollar powerhouse.
But, with Hillhouse as one of its only significant external shareholders, the company became an early pioneer in China in creating homegrown premium products.
Blue Moon built a billion-dollar business from scratch in five years, becoming the dominant player in the liquid-detergent segment, with a brand that is viewed more positively than its multinational competitors.
Many Chinese entrepreneurs share similar stories of sacrificing short-term profits for long-term position.
Tencent, now one of the largest Internet companies in the world, intentionally under-monetized its early social network, QQ, for many years in order to focus on consumer experience.
In its start-up years, search giant Baidu cut a profitable SMS-advertising business in order to focus on its core product: search.
Portfolio managers take on risk when they “change horses,” reallocating from a company they know well to a new investment.
By contrast, working with entrepreneurs to build their companies for the long term and strengthen their competitive legs allows capital to stay invested and reduces the risk that turnover creates.
A long-term strategy must extend to research, with employees encouraged to look beyond the short term.
When a team member has a good idea, he or she should spend months, even years, learning as much as possible about the business or sector without the pressure of finding a commercial application.
My firm has done well by any measure over the past ten years, but not without periods of underperformance.
We can hold onto companies with strong long-term fundamentals but poor-performing stock prices because our investors understand what we are doing and give us the leeway to execute our strategy.
This underscores the fact that long-term investing cannot exist in a vacuum; it needs a supportive ecosystem.
The short-term mentality of some market players may provide some interesting trading opportunities, but it impedes the development of a system in which innovation thrives.
Entrepreneurs cannot reach their full potential without staunch support from investors, and investors cannot provide that support without the backing of their clients.
In China, I have organized a group of equity investors to share ideas and insights about fundamental investing, and I help start-up fund managers who share a long-term philosophy get their businesses off the ground.
Even a few of my own team have questioned why I am so eager to develop potential competitors.
The reason is simple: the pie is big enough for everyone – or will be if we work together to make it grow.
PARIS – Faced with a slowing global economy, a number of observers – including former US Federal Reserve Chair Ben Bernanke and Berkeley economist Brad DeLong – have argued that money-financed fiscal expansion should not be excluded from the policy toolkit.
But talk of such “helicopter drops” of newly printed money has produced a strong counterattack, including from Michael Heise, the chief economist of Allianz, and Koichi Hamada, the chief economic adviser to Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and one of the architects of Japan’s “Abenomics” economic-recovery program.
I disagree with Heise and Hamada, but they rightly focus on the central issue – the risk that allowing any monetary finance will invite excessive use.
The crucial question is whether we can devise rules and responsibilities to guard against that danger.
I believe we can and must, and that in some countries the alternative will not be no monetary finance, but monetary finance implemented without discipline.
As I argued in a recent International Monetary Fund paper, the technical case for monetary finance is indisputable.
It is the one policy that will always stimulate nominal demand, even when other policies – such as debt-financed fiscal deficits or negative interest rates – are ineffective.
And its impact on nominal demand can in principle be calibrated: A small amount will produce a potentially useful stimulus to either output or the price level, whereas a very large amount will produce excessive inflation.
If money creation finances tax cuts rather than increased public expenditure, the impact will depend on how much consumers decide to spend versus save – a balance that may be unstable over time.
And, because money creation by central banks increases commercial banks’ reserves, there is a risk that lending will increase little at first, but then rapidly.
But these complexities simply argue for a cautious approach to the scale of monetary finance and the careful use of tools – such as mandatory-reserve requirements – to constrain subsequent knock-on effects.
The only powerful argument against helicopter drops is the one that Heise and Hamada stress – the political risk of overuse.
If monetary finance is no longer prohibited, politicians might use it to curry favor with political constituencies or to over-stimulate the economy ahead of an election.
Hamada oddly suggests that proponents of monetary finance ignore this risk; but in my own IMF paper, and in Bernanke’s recent blog post, it is a central concern.
History provides many examples of excessive monetary finance, from Weimar Germany to the many emerging economies where governments have pressured central banks to finance large fiscal deficits, with high inflation the inevitable result.
So a valid argument can be made that the dangers of excessive monetary finance are so great that it should be prohibited entirely, even if in some circumstances it would be the best policy.
After all, other policies to support demand growth, or a failure to implement any policy, can be equally dangerous.
It was deflation, not hyperinflation, that destroyed the Weimar Republic.
The root cause of today’s problems was excessive private credit growth before 2008.
If our only way out is interest rates negative enough to re-stimulate that rapid growth, we are doomed to repeat past mistakes.
Moreover, there is no reason why we cannot construct rules and responsibilities to mitigate the political risk of excessive use.
Bernanke, for example, has proposed giving independent central banks the authority to approve a maximum quantity of monetary finance if they believe doing so is necessary to achieve their clearly defined inflation target.
Of course, opponents can counter with a “slippery slope” argument: Only total prohibition is a defensible line against political pressure for ever-laxer rules.
And in countries with a recent history of excessive monetary finance – for example, Brazil, which is still struggling to contain inflation amid political pressures for large deficit finance – that argument could be compelling.
But if the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, or the Fed could independently approve a maximum quantity of monetary finance, no erosion of their independence would inevitably follow.
The crucial issue is whether political systems can be trusted to establish and maintain appropriate discipline.
Hamada cites the example of Japanese Finance Minister Korekiyo Takahashi, who used monetary-financed fiscal expansion to pull Japan’s economy out of recession in the early 1930s.
Takahashi rightly sought to tighten policy once adequate output and price growth had returned, but was assassinated by militarists keen to use unconstrained monetary finance to support imperial expansion.
But Hamada’s inference that this illustrates the inherent dangers of monetary finance is not credible.
Continued deflation would also have destroyed Japan’s constitutional system, as it did Germany’s.
And if Takahashi had stimulated the economy with negative interest rates, and then sought to reverse that policy, he would have met the same end.
Prohibition of monetary finance cannot secure democracy or the rule of law in the face of powerful anti-democratic forces.
But disciplined and moderate monetary finance, by combating deflationary dangers, might sometimes help.
The likely alternative is not no monetary finance, but monetary finance implemented too late and in an undisciplined fashion.
Having eschewed monetary finance for too long, it now has so much public debt (about 250% of GDP) that if that debt were all monetized, excessive inflation would probably result.
But there is no credible scenario in which that debt can ever be “repaid” in the normal sense of the word.
De facto monetization is the inevitable result, with the Bank of Japan purchasing each month more bonds than the government issues, even while it denies that monetary finance is an acceptable policy option.
If Japan had followed Bernanke’s advice in 2003 and implemented a moderate money-financed stimulus, it would today have a slightly higher price level and a lower debt-to-GDP ratio.
Having failed to do that, it should now define clear rules and responsibilities to govern and manage as best as possible the inevitable monetization of some part of its accumulated debts.
The lesson of Japan – but not only Japan – is clear: It is better to recognize the technical case for monetary finance and mitigate the political dangers than to prohibit its use entirely and pile up still greater dangers for the future.
NEW YORK – Of all major world regions, Europe has worked the hardest to implement policies aimed at countering human-caused climate change.
Yet the cornerstone of Europe’s approach – a continent-wide emissions trading system for the greenhouse gases that cause climate change – is in trouble.
That experience suggests a better strategy for both Europe and the rest of the world.
The basic story of human-caused climate change is becoming clearer to the global public.
Several gases, including carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide, warm the planet as their concentrations in the atmosphere increase.
As the world economy grows, so do emissions of these gases, accelerating the pace of human-caused climate change.
Most CO2 emissions result from the burning of fossil fuels – coal, oil, and natural gas – for energy, global consumption of which is rising as the world economy grows.
As a result, we are on a path to very dangerous levels of CO2 in the atmosphere.
Twenty years ago, the world agreed to reduce sharply emissions of CO2 and other greenhouse gases, but little progress has been made.
Instead, the rapid growth of the emerging economies, especially coal-burning China, has caused global CO2 emissions to soar.
If the world continues on its current trajectory, global temperatures will eventually rise by several degrees centigrade, causing higher sea levels, mega-storms, severe heat waves, massive crop failures, extreme droughts, heavy flooding, and a sharp loss of biodiversity.
Yet changing the world’s energy system is a daunting challenge, because fossil fuels are so deeply embedded in the workings of the global economy.
Coal and gas are burned in huge and growing amounts to produce electricity and to provide energy for industry.
How, then, can we sustain worldwide economic progress while cutting back sharply on carbon emissions?
There are essentially two solutions, but neither has been deployed on a large scale.
The first is to shift massively from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources, especially wind power and solar power.
(Hydroelectric power generation emits no CO2, but there are only a few remaining places in the world where it can be expanded without major environmental or social costs.)
But this technology, called carbon capture and sequestration (CCS), is not yet proven on a large scale.
One approach is to capture the CO2 at the power plant as the coal or gas is burned.
Either way, CCS will require significant investment in further research and development before it becomes a viable technology.
If we had a century to change the world’s energy system, we could feel reasonably secure.
Yet we must complete most of the transformation to low-carbon energy by mid-century.
This is extraordinarily difficult given the long transition period needed to overhaul the world’s energy infrastructure, including not only power plants, transmission lines, and transport systems, but also homes and commercial buildings.
In fact, the United States is now investing heavily in natural gas without recognizing or caring that its shale-gas boom, based on new hydraulic-fracturing technology, is likely to make matters worse.
Even if the US economy shifts from coal to natural gas, America’s coal will probably be exported for use elsewhere in the world.
In any event, natural gas, though somewhat less carbon-intensive than coal, is a fossil fuel; burning it will cause unacceptable climate damage.
Only Europe has tried to make a serious shift away from carbon emissions, creating a system that requires each industrial emitter to obtain a permit for each ton of CO2 emissions.
Because these permits trade at a market price, companies have an incentive to reduce their emissions, thereby requiring them to buy fewer permits or enabling them to sell excess permits for a profit.
The problem is that the permits’ market price has plummeted in the midst of Europe’s economic slowdown.
Permits that used to sell for more than $30 per ton before the crisis now trade for under $10.
At this low price, companies have little incentive to cut back on their CO2 emissions – and little faith that a market-based incentive will return.
As a result, much of European industry continues on a business-as-usual energy path, even as Europe tries to lead the world in this transformation.
Each region of the world should introduce a tax on CO2 emissions that starts low today and increases gradually and predictably in the future.
Part of the tax revenue should be channeled into subsidies for new low-carbon energy sources like wind and solar, and to cover the costs of developing CCS.
These subsidies could start fairly high and decline gradually over time, as the tax on CO2 emissions rises and the costs of new energy technologies fall with more experience and innovation.
With a long-term and predictable carbon tax and subsidy system, the world would move systematically toward low-carbon energy, greater energy efficiency, and CCS.
The need for all major world regions to adopt practical and far-sighted energy policies is more urgent than ever.
NEW YORK – With the value of Bitcoin having fallen by around 70% since its peak late last year, the mother of all bubbles has now gone bust.
More generally, cryptocurrencies have entered a not-so-cryptic apocalypse.
The value of leading coins such as Ether, EOS, Litecoin, and XRP have all fallen by over 80%, thousands of other digital currencies have plummeted by 90-99%, and the rest have been exposed as outright frauds.
No one should be surprised by this: four out of five initial coin offerings (ICOs) were scams to begin with.
Faced with the public spectacle of a market bloodbath, boosters have fled to the last refuge of the crypto scoundrel: a defense of “blockchain,” the distributed-ledger software underpinning all cryptocurrencies.
Blockchain has been heralded as a potential panacea for everything from poverty and famine to cancer.
In fact, it is the most overhyped – and least useful – technology in human history.
But it has also become the byword for a libertarian ideology that treats all governments, central banks, traditional financial institutions, and real-world currencies as evil concentrations of power that must be destroyed.
Blockchain fundamentalists’ ideal world is one in which all economic activity and human interactions are subject to anarchist or libertarian decentralization.
They would like the entirety of social and political life to end up on public ledgers that are supposedly “permissionless” (accessible to everyone) and “trustless” (not reliant on a credible intermediary such as a bank).
Yet far from ushering in a utopia, blockchain has given rise to a familiar form of economic hell.
A few self-serving white men (there are hardly any women or minorities in the blockchain universe) pretending to be messiahs for the world’s impoverished, marginalized, and unbanked masses claim to have created billions of dollars of wealth out of nothing.
But one need only consider the massive centralization of power among cryptocurrency “miners,” exchanges, developers, and wealth holders to see that blockchain is not about decentralization and democracy; it is about greed.
For example, a small group of companies – mostly located in such bastions of democracy as Russia, Georgia, and China – control between two-thirds and three-quarters of all crypto-mining activity, and all routinely jack up transaction costs to increase their fat profit margins.
Apparently, blockchain fanatics would have us put our faith in an anonymous cartel subject to no rule of law, rather than trust central banks and regulated financial intermediaries.
Fully 99% of all transactions occur on centralized exchanges that are hacked on a regular basis.
And, unlike with real money, once your crypto wealth is hacked, it is gone forever.
Moreover, the centralization of crypto development – for example, fundamentalists have named Ethereum creator Vitalik Buterin a “benevolent dictator for life” – already has given lie to the claim that “code is law,” as if the software underpinning blockchain applications is immutable.
The truth is that the developers have absolute power to act as judge and jury.
When something goes wrong in one of their buggy “smart” pseudo-contracts and massive hacking occurs, they simply change the code and “fork” a failing coin into another one by arbitrary fiat, revealing the entire “trustless” enterprise to have been untrustworthy from the start.
Lastly, wealth in the crypto universe is even more concentrated than it is in North Korea.
Whereas a Gini coefficient of 1.0 means that a single person controls 100% of a country’s income/wealth, North Korea scores 0.86, the rather unequal United States scores 0.41, and Bitcoin scores an astonishing 0.88.
As should be clear, the claim of “decentralization” is a myth propagated by the pseudo-billionaires who control this pseudo-industry.
Now that the retail investors who were suckered into the crypto market have all lost their shirts, the snake-oil salesmen who remain are sitting on piles of fake wealth that will immediately disappear if they try to liquidate their “assets.”
As for blockchain itself, there is no institution under the sun – bank, corporation, non-governmental organization, or government agency – that would put its balance sheet or register of transactions, trades, and interactions with clients and suppliers on public decentralized peer-to-peer permissionless ledgers.
There is no good reason why such proprietary and highly valuable information should be recorded publicly.
Moreover, in cases where distributed-ledger technologies – so-called enterprise DLT – are actually being used, they have nothing to do with blockchain.
They are private, centralized, and recorded on just a few controlled ledgers.
And, perhaps most important, they are based on trusted authorities that have established their credibility over time.
All of which is to say, these are “blockchains” in name only.
It is telling that all “decentralized” blockchains end up being centralized, permissioned databases when they are actually put into use.
As such, blockchain has not even improved upon the standard electronic spreadsheet, which was invented in 1979.
No serious institution would ever allow its transactions to be verified by an anonymous cartel operating from the shadows of the world’s authoritarian kleptocracies.
So it is no surprise that whenever “blockchain” has been piloted in a traditional setting, it has either been thrown in the trash bin or turned into a private permissioned database that is nothing more than an Excel spreadsheet or a database with a misleading name.
LONDON – As 2015 begins, the reality of deficient global demand and deflationary risks in the world’s major economies is starkly apparent.
In the eurozone, GDP growth is slowing, and inflation has turned negative.
Even economies experiencing more robust economic growth will miss their targets: inflation in the United States will not reach 1.5% this year, and China’s rate reached a five-year low of 1.4% last November.
In the advanced economies, low inflation reflects not just the temporary impact of falling commodity prices, but also longer-term wage stagnation.
In the US, the United Kingdom, Japan, and several eurozone countries, median real (inflation-adjusted) wages remain below their 2007 levels.
Indeed, in the US, real wages for the bottom quartile have not risen in three decades.
And, though the US created 295,000 new jobs last December, actual cash wages fell.
As the International Labor Organization’s latest Global Wage Report shows, wage gains are lagging far behind productivity growth.
Because real income growth is vital to boost consumption and prices, central bankers and politicians are now in the novel business of encouraging wage increases.
Last July, Bundesbank President Jens Weidmann welcomed the fact that some German companies had raised wages above inflation.
Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has gone a step further, repeatedly urging companies to increase wages – and encouraging them to do so by reducing corporate tax.
This failure would not have surprised the monetarist economists who observed the high inflation of the 1970s.
At the time, many policymakers blamed rapid price increases on “cost push” factors, such as pressure from trade unions for excessive wage hikes.
Finance ministers and central banks frequently urged wage moderation, with many countries even introducing formal policies governing wages and prices.
Instead, it seemed increasingly clear that, as Milton Friedman put it, “inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon.”
If nominal demand grows faster than real potential growth, inflation is inevitable; and nominal demand growth can be constrained only through a mix of fiscal and monetary policy.
Indeed, inflation was finally crushed in the early 1980s, when central banks raised interest rates to whatever level was required to constrain nominal demand, even if it led to high transitional unemployment.
But, though central banks claimed credit for the “Great Moderation” of global inflation that followed, structural factors (which determine the intensity of cost-push effects) also played a crucial role.
For starters, the entry of China’s massive labor force into the global market economy changed the power balance between capital and labor in the advanced economies.
Trade unions’ membership and influence declined sharply, owing to increased global competition and, in some countries, deliberate legal reforms.
Minimum wages, particularly in the US, were allowed to fall relative to median incomes.
More recently, technological advances have become an increasingly important driver of structural transformation, with information technology and job automation reducing wage rates for low-skill jobs and further eroding the political and market power of organized labor.
Today’s ultra-flexible labor markets, characterized by part-time, temporary, and zero-hours contracts, are very different from those that generated cost-push inflation in the 1960s and 1970s.
The result in many countries has been stagnant real wages, increased inequality, and a potential structural bias toward deficient nominal demand.
Given that wealthy people have a higher propensity to save, increased inequality tends to produce sluggish demand growth – unless, that is, the savings of the wealthy are lent to the poor.
As a result, while central bankers before the 2008 financial crisis viewed themselves as heroes in a battle against inflation, they increasingly found themselves offsetting structural deflationary pressures by setting interest rates low enough to stimulate credit booms.
This led to excessive debt creation, financial crisis, and now a chronic aggregate-demand shortfall, with households, companies, and governments all seeking to reduce their debt.
But, though structural factors and debt overhangs underpin today’s inadequate demand, a purely macroeconomic response might still solve the problem.
Just as determined monetary restraint 30 years ago ultimately overwhelmed cost-push pressures, an equally determined policy in the other direction could, in theory, boost nominal demand growth today.
The best way to achieve that is not through the current mix of ultra-low interest rates and quantitative easing.
After all, though this approach would eventually stimulate demand, it would do so by driving up asset prices – thereby exacerbating wealth inequality – and by re-stimulating the private-credit growth that fueled the financial crisis.
But policymakers always have another option for creating nominal demand: printing money to finance their fiscal deficits.
The permanent availability of this approach – what Friedman called “helicopter” money – makes deficient nominal demand one of the very few economic problems for which there is always an answer.
Nonetheless, such a purely macroeconomic approach to the battle against deflation would almost certainly not be optimal.
A better strategy would also entail policies that address the structural drivers of stagnant wages and consumption.
Though the easing of rules for hiring and firing workers has probably helped to boost employment in some countries, such as the UK, it may also be depressing real wages.
Raising minimum wages could help limit the erosion of real earnings in the bottom quartile.
And tax and social-welfare systems can be used to channel income toward those most likely to spend it.
Because deflation, like inflation, is ultimately a monetary phenomenon, fiscal and monetary weapons are the most critical means to combating it.
Weidmann and Abe are right: some cost-push pressure would be useful.
SEOUL – There was a time, not long after the Cold War’s end, when almost everyone assumed that North Korea would soon collapse.
The sudden death in 1994 of Kim Il-sung, the founder of the tyrannical, economically disastrous North Korean experiment, reinforced this belief.
Today, no one can credibly say that North Korea’s dynastic regime, now led by “Dear Leader” Kim Jong-il, a son of the late “Great Leader” Kim Il-sung, is certain to fall.
From insistence that the end of the Kim dynasty was approaching, consensus is emerging on the continued existence of their regime.
Immediately after the stroke that killed his father at an exclusive summer resort villa on a remote mountain, Kim Jong-il consolidated political power by concentrating it in the hands of a very few diehard loyalists – and jailing, torturing, and killing anyone he viewed as a political opponent.
Nevertheless, despite his long tenure, the Dear Leader’s hold on power sometimes has been threatened by a small group of dissidents.
And now that poor health has forced him to prepare to hand power to his third and youngest son, Kim Jong-un (the so-called “Young General”), opposition has become more visible.
On April 22, 2004, a train explosion at Ryongchon killed 160 people and injured 1,300.
Many believe that it was an attempt to assassinate Kim, whose custom-built train passed through Ryongchon a few hours before the blast.
Since then, South Korean intelligence institutions have been assessing Kim Jong-il’s ability to organize an orderly dynastic succession.
In particular, they have been monitoring the body count of senior North Korean officials who have suddenly retired, disappeared, or died in automobile accidents.
Indeed, the number of recent changes in the North Korean hierarchy strongly suggests serious domestic opposition to the continuance of Kim’s misbegotten rule.
Kim Il-chol, 80, an admiral and vice-minister for the armed forces, was removed from his post in May.
He was sent into retirement supposedly because of his advanced age, but there are even older figures in North Korea’s gerontocracy.
In addition, Pak Nam-gi, the senior finance ministry official considered responsible for North Korea’s botched issuance of a new currency last year, has disappeared, and Kim Yong-il, North Korea’s prime minister, was fired on June 7.
Ri Je-gang, a senior Workers’ Party director, was killed in a bizarre car crash on June 2.
The most common explanation for all of these changes is that Kim is circling the wagons around himself and the Young General.
A disciplined succession plan is needed because Kim is 68 and in bad health (and thus unlikely to still be holding power in 2012, the year he targeted for North Korea to become a “Strong and Prosperous Country”).
In the meantime, the armed forces appear to remain loyal to Kim, willing to carry out his orders even at the risk of bringing the country to the brink of war, such as by sinking the South Korean naval ship Cheonan in March and warning of “powerful nuclear deterrence” against joint South Korean and American military drills.
While the United Nations Security Council debates how to reprimand North Korea for the attack on the Cheonan, few people in South Korea believe that any punishment will deter Kim or shorten the life of his regime.
Moreover, from the beginning South Korea had little faith in the UN even trying to act, due to China’s veto in the Security Council.
Indeed, China offered South Korea a veiled warning that it “should not sweat the small stuff,” implying that the unprovoked killing of 46 South Korean sailors is a petty matter, and certainly not one that will cause China to rethink its alliance with North Korea.
North Korea’s unpredictability and China’s cynical irresponsibility appear to be boxing in South Korean President Lee Myung-bak’s conservative government.
Lee must not only calculate how tough to be with North Korea in response to the death of the Cheonan sailors, but also find a way to keep working with Kim Jong-il’s police state.
Instead of pushing for serious UN sanctions, Lee’s government will eventually, it seems, focus on reviving the six-party (South and North Koreas, the United States, China, Japan, and Russia) talks to end the North’s nuclear-weapons program.
There is no way to know what will happen in North Korea when Kim dies.
But it is time for Asia’s powers to start thinking creatively and acting cooperatively to prevent a violent implosion.
For now, South Korea will need to rely on lionhearted tolerance in its relations with the North, because there is simply no other viable option at hand.
HONG KONG – Chinese Prime Minister Li Keqiang’s work plan for 2015, revealed at this month’s National People’s Congress, highlighted the country’s shift to a “new normal” of 7% economic growth.
The shift to slower growth poses serious challenges, but it also creates an important opportunity for China to ensure its long-term economic development.
China’s leaders recognize this opportunity, and are taking action to support the shift to more sustainable growth models.
The finance ministry has raised the central-government budget deficit from 1.8% of GDP in 2014 to as much as 2.7% in 2015, and will allow highly leveraged local governments to swap CN¥1 trillion ($161.1 billion) of debt maturing this year for bonds with lower interest rates.
Likewise, the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) has provided monetary support, gradually lowering interest rates and reserve requirements.
Because wages are still rising, the inflation target for 2015 has been set at 3% – higher than the actual 2014 inflation of 2%, even though producer-price inflation has been negative for 36 months.
The PBOC also has projected a stable exchange-rate environment for this year – despite the steep depreciation of the Japanese yen, the euro, and emerging-economy currencies against the dollar – thereby promoting global stability.
These policies reflect a remarkable determination to continue on the path of structural reform, despite strong headwinds from the deteriorating external environment and domestic structural adjustments.
In short, China’s government seems to have a clear long-term vision.
Veteran China watcher David Shambaugh recently went so far as to warn that the challenges facing the political system, led by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), may be severely compromising the government’s ability to implement the package of ambitious economic reforms that it unveiled in 2013.
And yet the claim that China’s economic and political development is in jeopardy seems to ignore the country’s adaptive learning process, which shapes every economic, diplomatic, military, and social policy.
This process – characterized by experimentation, assessment, and adjustment – emerged from the CCP’s military experience of the 1930s, was applied by Deng Xiaoping to his reform program in the 1980s, and has been refined by subsequent Chinese leaders.
Because no economy had ever experienced such rapid growth on such a large scale, the only way to manage China’s development was, as Deng put it, to “cross the river by feeling the stones.”
China’s adaptive policymaking approach has produced both spectacular failures, with entire markets being shut down, and remarkable successes, yielding models that could be applied across the country.
Some experiments have had less clear results, making, say, a positive contribution to GDP growth, but also contributing to problems like excess industrial capacity, pollution, corruption, and the creation of ghost towns.
The mere fact that they have emerged in no way suggests that China is headed for disaster; that would be the case only if these problems were allowed to persist.
Preventing such an outcome requires that efforts to adjust to China’s “new normal” go beyond policies intended to sustain economic growth.
Reforms must aim to bolster inclusivity, advance environmental sustainability, promote innovation, and boost competitiveness.
And this is precisely the four-pronged approach that China’s leaders seem to be taking.
Indeed, from slashing coal consumption to address air pollution to plans for integrating information technologies with modern manufacturing, the government has shown time and again that it recognizes its reform imperatives.
And, by remaining dogged in its efforts to root out official graft, it has demonstrated its will to do what is needed to ensure that China succeeds.
The Chinese bureaucracy must adapt radically to cope with the risks – and take advantage of the benefits – of technology and globalization, with the biggest challenge being the shift to a knowledge-based, environmentally conscious, inclusive, and stable industrial base.
And China’s government must take steps to enable market forces to play a greater role in directing economic activity, including by reducing licensing and regulatory requirements in the private sector.
Indeed, continued real-wage growth is forcing inefficient industries that relied solely on cheap labor out of the market, while bolstering the competitiveness of producers that appeal to the evolving tastes of China’s increasingly potent consumers.
At the same time, China is reforming its inefficient approval-based system of initial public offerings to one based on registrations.
A more active and efficient IPO market will allow companies to meet their financing needs without bank intermediation – a step that is vital to helping firms eliminate their debt overhangs.
In fact, reducing the role of banks is essential to balancing China’s economy.
Despite the recent rebound, China’s stock-market capitalization amounts to only 40% of GDP, while banking assets total 266% of GDP.
But there is one important component missing from the government’s reform agenda for 2015: improved bankruptcy procedures for failed borrowers.
Unless failed borrowers and projects exit the system quickly and smoothly, the market will be saddled with bad debt and incomplete projects, undermining its performance.
Now, it must do so yet again, by ensuring that its “new normal” is as stable, sustainable, and inclusive as possible.
This entails strengthening China’s institutional foundations and establishing clear, transparent rules, in order to encourage experimentation and innovation, ensure the smooth exit of failed projects, and manage the fallout of errors.
Failure may be the mother of success – but only if one makes the effort to learn from it.
BERKELEY – Inequality is on the public’s mind almost everywhere nowadays.
Indeed, in the world’s two largest democracies, India and the United States, widespread popular movements against rising inequality and elite greed are becoming highly salient issues in looming national elections.
Yet, in both countries, some social inequalities have been on the decline over the last few decades.
In India, certain historically disadvantaged groups (particularly among the lower castes) are now politically assertive.
Similarly, in the US, discrimination against women, African-Americans, Latinos, and homosexuals is declining.
At the same time, however, the fabric of democracy is being torn apart by a staggering rise in economic inequality.
Generally, economic inequality is easier to justify than racism and other forms of invidious discrimination.
A fundamental tenet of American society is that everyone has an equal chance – a belief that appears more plausible with the decline of social bias.
In India, this myth is less powerful, but there is a general feeling, shared even by some of the poor, that the rich deserve their wealth because of their merit, education, and skills.
The rich have access to better schools, health care, nutrition, and social support than the poor, which plays a decisive part in later academic and social success.Pre-school children in rich families have better nutrition, health care, and mentoring; there is evidence that much of the brain damage due to malnourishment for poor children may have already, irreversibly, happened by age three.
When students from poor families start to fail in school, they have little or no access to remedial classes, whereas the rich receive expensive coaching from private tutors throughout their education.
As a result, India has the world’s largest number of school dropouts.
Sociologists in the US have also documented adverse “neighborhood effects” for poor children in inner cities.
In Indian villages, where residential patterns are often even more segmented, such effects are acute.
The other problem in both countries is the rising importance of ‘unearned incomes’.
In India, as in other fast-growing economies, scarce public resources, such as land, minerals, oil and gas, and telecommunication spectrum, have shot up in market value recently, generating extremely high unearned income for the politically well-connected.
In the US, the deregulation of the financial sector over the last few decades, and the accompanying rise of dubious financial instruments, destabilized the real economy while doing little to improve productivity.
The result, as everyone knows, was exorbitant financial gain for a select few, followed by large losses that were paid for by the many.
The US and Indian examples suggest that, in democratic societies, groups that promote social discrimination grow politically weaker over time.
Economic inequality, on the other hand, is perpetuated through the politically powerful and well-funded lobbies of the rich.
The trend is reinforced as elections become more expensive in both countries, leaving politicians increasingly dependent on contributions from wealthy donors who demand policies that are favorable to their interests.
This implies that anti-discrimination and egalitarian movements need to broaden their focus to include electoral reform, better financial regulation, transparent privatization, and, above all, an overhaul of the education system to ensure high-quality schools for the poor and pre-school nutrition and health care.
In addition, massive investment in both countries’ creaking physical infrastructure would create jobs for some workers and improve the productivity of others.
The advantages of improving education, creating more jobs, and increasing productivity seem clear.
The question, then, remains why India and the US neglect both education for the poor and infrastructure.
The answer lies partly in the fact that the rich in both countries are ceasing to use many public services.
They send their children to elite private schools, are treated in expensive private hospitals, and live in gated communities where security and other services are provided privately.
Moreover, big companies nowadays have their own power plants, private roads, and many internal services as well.
As the rich secede from the public infrastructure upon which the rest of society depends, it has become increasingly challenging to tax them in order to pay for services that they do not want or need.
Meanwhile the pre-existing countervailing institutions (like labor unions) for the workers get eroded by new technology and globalization.
In India, greater social equality has meant that small numbers of hitherto subordinate social groups have begun to enter the political and economic elite.
Once there, however, rather than trying to change conditions for the poor, they adopt the values of the elite while manipulating the symbols of identity politics – a tactic that still attracts votes.
(Democratic South Africa shows how difficult it is to make a dent in economic apartheid).
Both India and the US have responded to unrest over rising economic inequality with a kind of reactive populism.
In India, this takes the form of loan waivers for distressed farmers (which weaken the banks); price controls for water, electricity, and public transportation (which wreck government budgets and undermine the prospect of long-term investment in those areas); and more subsidized food in the corrupt and inefficient public distribution system.
Meanwhile, in the US, populist right-wing movements prefer tax cuts to long-term investment in infrastructure.
At the other end of the political spectrum, anti-state anarchists cannot help in building institutions that will sustain pro-poor investments.
They must find a way to channel the rising anger caused by economic inequality into productive investments that make the rich feel that they have a stake in ameliorating conditions for the poor.
If India and the US move towards overcoming the most pervasive inequality of all, they will reinvigorate their democracies – and their economies.
STOCKHOLM – In 2003, when the European Union drafted its first security strategy, the continent’s citizens lived in a seemingly safe world.
Indeed, the document’s opening sentence confidently proclaimed that “Europe has never been so prosperous, so secure nor so free.”
The EU’s foreign policy in its immediate neighborhood was focused on creating “a ring of friends,” from Morocco to Russia and the Black Sea.
The continent’s leaders are struggling to respond to a world that, in the words of a recent policy document, “has become more dangerous, divided, and disorienting.”
The EU finds itself surrounded by a ring of fire, not of friends, with hundreds of thousands of people crossing its borders to escape the inferno.
In the east, Russia’s intervention in Ukraine has driven some two million people from their homes – more than were displaced by the war in Bosnia and Herzegovina two decades ago.
Meanwhile, the horrific violence in Syria and disorder in North Africa have resulted in a sharp rise in the number of refugees, sparking talk of yet another crisis in the EU.
What the media portrays as a tidal wave is, in reality, little more than a trickle.
The vast majority of those who have fled the carnage in Syria live in camps in Jordan, Lebanon, and Turkey.
Indeed, at least ten Turkish cities are now home to more refugees than original inhabitants, and more Syrian refugees are living in Istanbul than in all the EU countries combined.
As a matter of statistics, the EU can clearly accommodate a million or more refugees.
This would amount to just 0.2% of the EU’s total population – far less than the number of people that member countries will need to admit in the coming decades to replenish their aging workforces.
Demographic data don’t capture the on-the-ground reality of asylum systems on the brink of collapse or economies struggling to provide housing and employment.
The biggest challenge for many EU leaders will be managing the domestic political reaction, as xenophobic and nationalist forces seek to stoke and capitalize on anti-immigrant sentiment.
Indeed, at the EU level, the divisions and debates among national governments came to the fore as leaders struggled to reach an agreement on a quota system for the distribution of refugees among member states.
In the end, the decision on the quota system was settled by majority vote, rather than the usual – and much preferred – rule of consensus (though the majority was large, with only four of 28 countries opposed).
Until this latest crisis, the discussion about the EU was dominated by talk of a divide between northern creditors and southern debtors.
Today, the hot topic is the division between western countries that welcome the refugees and eastern countries that want nothing to do with them.
But, despite all the disagreements and tensions, the real story may be that there is near-unanimous agreement that the solution must be European; everybody agrees that the challenges posed by the new world disorder are best faced together.
Indeed, some of the ideas proposed – a common asylum system and a common burden-sharing scheme – would constitute a clear transfer of sovereignty to the EU in an area once seen as a core national function.
Judging from opinion polls, the European public has come to see the EU’s handling of the euro crisis as a success.
Confidence in the EU has increased from 48% to 58% during the last three years, after a period of steady decline; skepticism about the European project dropped from 46% to 36%.
The pattern is starting to look familiar: a new crisis, a new meeting in Brussels, an initially muddled response, debates and divisions, and then gradual, step-by-step progress toward a common response, driven by the realization that there is no other alternative.
The public no longer thinks of the European project as some utopian endeavor, an abstract attempt to forge an ever-closer union.
Increasingly, the EU is coming to be seen as a practical – and absolutely essential – mechanism for a group of small countries to work together to meet their common challenges.
The people of the EU are indeed waking up to a world that is more dangerous, divided, and disorienting.
But it is an awakening that is more likely to bring them together than to drive them apart.
ABUJA – After 16 years in power, the People’s Democratic Party (PDP) will no longer lead Nigeria’s government, having lost last week’s presidential election to the opposition All Progressives Congress (APC).
Moreover, the outcome marks the first time since Nigeria achieved independence from Great Britain in 1960 that an incumbent has been displaced by a rival political party without violence.
This bodes well for the country at a time when it is facing unprecedented challenges.
Analysts had predicted that the election would be marred by violence like that following the presidential poll in 2011, which Muhammadu Buhari, a former military dictator and candidate of the Congress for Progressive Change (CPC), lost to the PDP’s Goodluck Jonathan.
The mainly Muslim northern part of the country – Buhari’s home base – was convulsed by anarchy and bloodshed as thugs and hooligans took to the streets, attacking Christians and non-northerners, whom they accused of voting for Jonathan.
Though logistical issues arose, the independent Nigerian Election Commission responded effectively, allowing voting in several areas to be extended by one day.
Another notable feature of the election was Jonathan’s concession to Buhari, which came as the results from Nigeria’s 36 states began to trickle into the election commission’s headquarters in the capital.
Typically, losers of Nigerian elections accuse their opponents of cheating and ask the courts to determine the “real” winner.
The APC, which nominated Buhari this time around, was established only in 2013, but it emerged with much fanfare.
Its promoters criticized the PDP for having done little to improve Nigerians’ living standards, and they unveiled a set of policies and programs that they claimed would lead the country to sustained prosperity.
The APC was not so much a new party as an amalgamation of three small parties that had been trying to displace the PDP since 1999.
These parties enjoyed the support of two of Nigeria’s three main ethnic groups, the Hausa-Fulani, who dominate the north, and the Yoruba, who live in the southwest.
The APC was able to exploit divisions within the PDP, which were exacerbated by Jonathan’s controversial participation in the 2011 election, to swell its ranks further.
The split within the PDP began in 2010, when President Umaru Yar’Adua, a Muslim northerner, died after only three years in office, and Jonathan, an ethnic Ijaw from the south and Yar’Adua’s deputy, took his place.
Northern PDP leaders complained that Yar’Adua’s predecessor, a Christian southerner, had ruled Nigeria for eight years and that it was only fair that a northerner should hold power.
They asked Jonathan not to run in 2011, and insisted that the PDP nominate a candidate from the north.
Jonathan’s refusal to heed their request, and his subsequent victory, not only triggered violent protests and turmoil in the north, but also left the PDP divided along ethno-regional lines.
When Jonathan indicated his plans to run for a second term this year, several northern politicians defected to the APC, considerably weakening the PDP.
Recognizing the north’s desperation to win back the presidency, the APC nominated Buhari.
With wide support in the north, as well as votes from the Yoruba southwest and several states in the middle of the country, Buhari was able to carry the day.
Votes for Jonathan came largely from his home South-South region and from the neighboring Igbo ethnic group in the southeast.
After all, in its 16 years in power, the party has been unable to tackle the main challenges facing Nigeria: rising unemployment, poor infrastructure, sclerotic social services, and an unstable economy that relies on oil exports for 95% of its foreign-exchange revenue.
Meanwhile, the violent Islamist sect Boko Haram continues to wreak havoc in the northeast.
In the recent election campaign, the PDP, unable to point to concrete achievements, simply made new promises.
The APC, for its part, faces an unenviable set of challenges.
The price of oil, the country’s main export, has dropped by half since December.
The Naira has lost 30% its value, manufacturers are complaining about rising import prices for raw material, and unemployment, particularly among recent graduates, is at an all-time high.
Boko Haram, meanwhile, has now allied itself with the Islamic State, and vows to wage a relentless – and relentlessly vicious – insurgency.
During the campaign, Buhari and other APC leaders put little flesh on their proposed solutions to Nigeria’s many problems.
But now the APC must design and implement an effective strategy that leads to genuine improvement in the lives of ordinary Nigerians.
A peaceful start is a good start, but a change in the party in charge is not the only change that Nigeria needs.
Last week, the President of the European Convention, Valery Giscard d'Estaing, submitted a so-called "skeleton" for a future Constitution of Europe.
All the ingredients of a constitution - values, principles, the rights of citizens, the competencies of the Union and its constituent institutions, etc - were included.
This document arose despite the fact that the Convention's mandate did not empower the delegates to produce a constitution.
According to the Nice Declaration, which I drafted as one of the participating prime ministers, we were only to simplify and restructure the EU's basic treaties.
As the C onvention worked, our mandate was transformed due to various pressures.
These came from member countries, from civil society organizations, and from letters, documents, and email messages from across Europe.
When even the Foreign Minister of Britain, a country happy with its centuries-old "unwritten constitution," claims himself eager to have a written European Constitution, something truly has changed!
Yet, scholars such as Ralph Dahrendorf and Joseph Weiler suggest that a European constitution does not make sense because a democratic constitution presupposes a paramount common identity that is absent in an EU where individual national loyalties still prevail.
Others, such as Robert Dahl, argue that democracy requires smaller communities based on shared interests and personal relations.
Such theoretical objections must be set against the fact Europe already exists - indeed, decisions are made everyday on the European level which determine our lives.
We may dislike it, but the EU is part of our system of government, like municipalities, regions, and nation-states.
So the question is not whether Europe exists, but whether we are satisfied with the way it functions.
If not, can we fix it, and is a constitution the way to do it?
The first problem in need of a "constitutional" solution that is tackled is Europe's clear and unified identity.
Not many people realize it, but because of the patchwork of treaties from which today's European institutions arose, "Europe" is not a unitary entity; indeed, the "European Union" and the "European Community" denote two different things.
The Community is the set of institutions created in the 1950's to establish a common market.
When we decided later to have a common foreign policy, and to cooperate in judicial and police matters, we invented the Union.
One consequence of this is that agreements with third countries that involve both foreign and economic matters require two distinct treaties: one for the Union, one for the Community.
If it confuses them, how befuddling must it be for ordinary citizens?
How can a European citizen really identify with Europe if no single "Europe" exists?
If the Community does something that affects someone's rights, he or she can go to court.
But if the Union encroaches on your rights, access to a court may be closed because the Union happens to have no legal personality!
The next problem to be tackled - again with constitutional implications - is the anonymous, bureaucratic nature of European legal acts.
Criticizing institutions is as essential a part of democracy as protecting enumerated legal rights.
But Europe's institutions are hard to criticize because they produce acts that ordinary people cannot name or understand.
In national life, acts of parliaments are called "statutes" or "laws," and these usually have names that you can rally for and against.
In the EU we have " regulations," "directives," "decisions," "general guidelines," "common strategies," "common actions," "common positions" - a myriad that only experts can comprehend.
When a "directive" is issued, you don't know who is responsible; instead, they are known as, say, "Directive 17.62" (meaning that it is directive no.
In Italy there is now a controversial statute that will change the rules of criminal procedure in ways that might prove helpful to eminent public figures.
Because Europe has so many bodies that legislate - the Council of Ministers, the Council for Agriculture, the Council for Industry, the Council for the Environment, etc. - we cannot know who is doing what and why.
We need a single legislative council, a bicameral European Parliament, with one house representing member states, and the other the European electorate.
In this simplified system, legislation will be called legislation, and executive regulations, as in most legal systems, will fill in the gaps in primary legislation.
The draft constitutional document presented last week introduces small but significant changes that may empower Europe's citizens to both identify with and criticize Europe.
Whether it is called European Union, United States of Europe, United Europe, or something else, it will also provide for a unitary, simplified system of normative acts that will introduce more transparency and accountability.
The institutional structure envisaged by the proposed European Constitution should also reflect and help develop Europe's broader aspirations.
Europe must be more than a vehicle of economic integration, which is almost accomplished anyway.
Getting the proper balance among European, national, regional, and local institutions will be a crucial challenge.
But if the people are to ordain a Constitution for Europe, all of their ties and values will need to be respected by that Constitution.
The most recent Greek rescue, put in place barely six weeks ago, is on the brink of collapse.
The euro’s survival and, indeed, that of the European Union hang in the balance.
European leaders have responded with a cacophony of proposals for restoring confidence.
Jean-Claude Trichet, the president of the European Central Bank, has called for stricter budgetary rules.
Mario Draghi, head of the Bank of Italy and Trichet’s anointed successor at the ECB, has called for binding limits not on just budgets but also on a host of other national economic policies.
Guy Verhofstadt, leader of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe in the European Parliament, is only one in a growing chorus of voices calling for the creation of Eurobonds.
Germany’s finance minister, Wolfgang Schäuble, has suggested that Europe needs to move to full fiscal union.
If these proposals have one thing in common, it is that they all fail to address the eurozone’s immediate problems.
Some, like stronger fiscal rules and closer surveillance of policies affecting competitiveness, might help to head off some future crisis, but they will do nothing to resolve this one.
Other ideas, like moving to fiscal union, would require a fundamental revision of the EU’s founding treaties.
And issuing Eurobonds would require a degree of political consensus that will take months, if not years, to construct.
But Europe doesn’t have months, much less years, to resolve its crisis.
It is critical that leaders distinguish what must be done now from what can be left for later.
It is no coincidence that bank stocks were hit hardest in the recent financial crash.
The French and German governments, which have budgetary room for maneuver, can do so on their own.
In the case of countries with poor fiscal positions, Europe’s rescue fund, the European Financial Stability Facility, can lend for this purpose.
If still more money is required, the International Monetary Fund can create a special facility, using its own resources and matching funds put up by Asian governments and sovereign wealth funds.
The Greek people are making an almost superhuman effort to stabilize their finances and restructure their economy.
But the government continues to miss its fiscal targets, more because of the global slowdown than through any fault of its own.
This raises the danger that the EU and IMF will feel compelled to withdraw their support, leading to a disorderly debt default – and the social, political, and economic chaos that this scenario portends.
One poorly aimed rubber bullet might be all that is needed to turn the next street protest into an outright civil war.
The limp debt exchange agreed to in July can be thrown out and replaced by one that grants the country meaningful debt relief.
Those who have spoken of a Marshall Plan for Greece can put their money where their mouths are.
Without growth, tax revenues will remain stagnant, and the capacity to service debts will continue to erode.
But the fact of the matter is that northern European governments, constrained by domestic public opinion, remain unwilling to act.
Interest rates will have to be slashed, and the ECB will have to follow up with large-scale asset purchases like those recently announced by the Swiss National Bank.
If these three urgent tasks are completed, there will be plenty of time – and much time will be needed – to contemplate radical changes like new budgetary rules, harmonization of other national policies, and a move to full fiscal union.
But, as John Maynard Keynes famously quipped, “In the long run, we are all dead.”
European leaders’ continued focus on the long run at the expense of short-term imperatives may indeed be the death knell for their single currency.
MADRID – Barack Obama’s first year in office has been a sobering exercise in the limits of presidential power.
It also carries lessons about how the resilient and impersonal forces of history can constrain any leader’s drive for change.
Obama’s current “winter of discontent” genuinely reflects the mixed record of his first year.
The Massachusetts electoral debacle only highlighted the growing rift between the president’s agenda and popular sensibilities.
Admittedly, Obama inherited a collapsing financial system, a declining world order, and the ever-present threat of global terrorism.
In his titanic efforts to stem decline and reform America, Obama has shown vision and talent, but he also learned the hard way that, as Henry Kissinger put it in his memoirs, the pledges of new administrations are almost invariably like “leaves on a turbulent sea.”
The impossible deadlines, the always ambiguous information the president is fed, and the complex choices that he must make are too frequently bound to clash with political constraints and the resistance to change of both allies and foes.
The president’s domestic agenda is bold and revolutionary, but it clashes frontally with the most fundamental tenets of America’s liberal and individualistic ethos.
His health-care reform plan, as the Massachusetts vote demonstrated, is perceived as a personal obsession and an entirely unnecessary distraction from much more urgent and vital concerns, such as the financial crisis and unemployment.
But creating a structure of international relations that will make a more stable and enduring world order is not a task to be completed within one year.
Nor is it at all certain that the sacrifices required of a country already stretched beyond the limits of its financial capabilities, together with the resistance of world powers, will allow this to be accomplished even in a single presidential term.
Iraq is showing some positive signs of political and institutional recovery, but the omens for the future remain, in Obama’s own words, “messy.”
The disintegration of an already fragmented country, the return of civil war, and the shadow of Iran’s power being cast over the Iraqi state are all plausible scenarios.
A man of peace, Obama has become no less a war president than his predecessor.
Having seen the harsh realities of the world as it really is , he has become the champion of the “just war.”
In Afghanistan, he opted for a substantial military surge, but the notion of victory that would allow for a withdrawal of troops remains as foggy and uncertain as it was in the case of Iraq.
Secretary of Defense Robert Gates was right to recognize that the Taliban are “part of the political fabric” of Afghanistan and thus “need to participate in the country’s government.”
But this might not be achieved without involving the major regional stakeholders, including Pakistan, China, and possibly Iran.
The Obama administration’s failure in re-launching the India-Pakistan peace talks over Kashmir is one of the gravest weaknesses of its “AfPak” strategy.
If these two countries’ mutual hostility is not reined in, and a fundamentalist Afghanistan continues to provide the strategic depth through which Pakistan threatens its sworn Indian enemies, the current disaster might still breed defeat.
Obama is right to boast of his success in enlisting China to join serious sanctions on North Korea, but he might be wrong to draw conclusions from this about Iran, a vital strategic partner for the Chinese.
Likewise, America’s “reset button” policy with Russia has certainly improved relations with the Kremlin, but it remains highly improbable that the Russians would endanger their privileged relations with Iran by joining an economic siege.
Israel ’s fear that the failure of sanctions might bring the United States to accept coexistence with a nuclear-armed Iran in the way it did with the Soviet Union during the Cold War is not entirely unfounded.
Obama’s administration will not start a war with a third Muslim country while the two others continue to burn.
Iran might eventually turn into the graveyard of Obama’s dream of a world without nuclear weapons.
George Bernard Shaw once observed that “in the arts of peace Man is a bungler.”
Obama has just admitted that in the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, a president can also be one.
“This is as intractable a problem as you get,” he admitted after a wasted year of more error than trial.
He naively ignored the harsh lessons of 20 years of abortive peacemaking, and insisted on sticking to the worn-out paradigm of direct negotiations between parties that, when left to their own devices, are bound to come to a deadlock.
He was commendably humble to admit that he was wrong “to have raised expectations so high.”
With no breakthrough in the Arab-Israeli conflict, Obama is left with the epicenter of the Middle East’s maladies seriously undermining his entire strategy in the region.
Yet he continues to be the greatest promise for a better world that this political generation can offer.
And he still has time to vindicate Woodrow Wilson’s belief that a “president can be just as big a man as he chooses to be.”
WASHINGTON, DC – US President Donald Trump and his Secretary of the Treasury, Steven Mnuchin, have promised an economic miracle.
They argue that when the United States adopts their policies, it will consistently achieve annual economic growth above 3%, or even above 4%.
After a year of being in charge, pushing hard on deregulation, and getting what it wanted in terms of tax cuts, how is the Trump team doing?
We are still in the early days, but the results so far have been disappointing.
And the US’s medium-term prospects for sustained growth could be endangered if Trump pursues the policies he claims to want.
Trump has repeatedly argued that America’s overall economic performance in 2017 should be seen as the direct result of his policies, and he has made a big deal out of the third-quarter growth rate, which was initially reported as 3.3%, then revised down to 3.2%.
Yet, in the fourth quarter, growth was down to 2.6%, and initial estimates suggest that overall growth for the year will not surpass 2.3%.
That is lower than what was achieved under former President Barack Obama in 2014 (2.6%) and 2015 (2.9%).
In fact, under Obama, the quarterly growth rate surpassed 3% seven times, and even reached 4.6% on two occasions.
From the third quarter of 2009, growth was positive in every quarter, save two.
But not only was headline growth sturdy under Obama; his administration also presided over considerable job growth – the economy added more than two million jobs annually in seven out of his eight years in office – as well as falling unemployment and higher labor-force participation.
Far from a miracle, Trump has failed to deliver any kind of improvement to economic growth.
To understand why, it helps to remember that Trump has not actually done much in office.
Notwithstanding his constant bragging about deregulation, the total economic impact of his regulatory repeals has been trivial relative to the size of the economy.
Moreover, the tax cuts that Trump signed into law at the end of 2017 will have very little positive impact on growth.
The tax package is primarily about redistribution from middle-income households – particularly those in high-tax, Democratic-leaning states such as New York and California – to the richest Americans.
People who own capital that is already in place – such as large buildings in New York – will do well.
But the law does not offer much of an incentive to invest in new capital, either by launching a new company, developing new products, or investing in new plants and equipment.
Furthermore, as I pointed out at a recent Intelligence Squared US debate in New York, the law may actually have a negative effect on research and development, which is a key driver of long-term growth in the US.
Looking at the 2017 data, there is no sign that business investment ticked upward under Trump.
Yes, this is a volatile data series, because it rises and falls with the usual course of events.
But it is also another area where Obama set the bar high during his two terms.
The most positive thing that can be said about Trump’s first year of economic policymaking is that he did not deliver on his campaign promise to disrupt trade.
The North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) remains intact, as do trade relations with China and other major US partners.
The administration did impose tariffs in January on solar panels and washing machines, but those are small relative to the size of the economy.
As a result, Trump has not caused a massive, self-inflicted recession, and we should perhaps congratulate his team more often for avoiding that scenario.
Having terminated the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program last year, Trump has put 800,000 young people who were brought to the US illegally as children in danger of being thrown out of the country.
Given that these are highly productive people who contribute heavily to the US economy, Trump’s approach could have dire economic, not to mention human, consequences.
Trump and his allies are also pursuing sharp reductions in legal immigration, which would reduce the US’s medium-term growth prospects, perhaps significantly.
If he does take any steps in this direction, it will not be helpful to the US economy.
Ironically, it could also do great damage to the Mexican economy, likely resulting in increased undocumented migration to the US.
Without any such disruption, however, demographic trends suggest that migration from Latin America to the US will continue to decline steadily.
Both the Trump administration and the Republican-led Congress are attempting to roll back protections against systemic risk that were put in place after the 2008 financial crisis.
When George W. Bush’s administration did the same thing, we were left with the Great Recession.
WASHINGTON, DC – Mahmoud Ahmadinejad has now made the mistake that all Iranian presidents make: he has challenged the authority of the country’s Supreme Leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
The challenge posed by Ahmadinejad is such a predictable part of Iranian politics that it has come to be known as “the president’s symptom.”
It emerges from a president’s confidence that, as a popularly elected leader, he should not be constrained by the Supreme Leader’s oversight.
But the Islamic Republic’s history is littered with its presidents’ failed attempts to consolidate an independent power center.
This dual authority is embedded in the Islamic Republic’s constitution, and inevitably tilts toward the divine, particularly in a president’s second term.
In fact, because he has pushed harder than his predecessors, his star is falling faster.
Moreover, the controversial presidential election of June 2009, and the political crisis that ensued, irreparably damaged Ahmadinejad’s democratic legitimacy.
Khamenei was forced to use his authority to support the president, and has since repeatedly condemned the “Green Movement” that opposed Ahmadinejad’s re-election.
As a result, Ahmadinejad has been the most costly president for Khamenei to date, because he forced the Supreme Leader to deplete his power in the face of a common enemy – a move that called into question his own judgment and tarnished his reputation.
Ahmadinejad himself, however, has generally ignored the post-election crisis in his public statements, and evidently believed that Khamenei’s post-election support meant that the Supreme Leader would remain passive in the face of encroachments on his traditional powers and prerogatives.
Indeed, for the last two years, Ahmadinejad has repeatedly undermined parliament, and abruptly dismissed ministers tied to Khamenei, like Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki and Intelligence Minister Heydar Moslehi.
Since becoming Supreme Leader 22 years ago, Khamenei has been relatively weak, but has adapted by seeking to encourage weakness in the Islamic Republic’s other high offices.
He has supported factionalization in the government, and, when necessary, has weakened factions that he previously supported.
Most importantly, he has ensured that Iran’s presidents remain weak, regardless of their agenda or popularity.
So, now that the threat posed by the Green Movement has diminished – at least in Khamenei’s eyes – the time has come to call Ahmadinejad to account.
Both men are hard at work preparing for the March 2012 parliamentary election, as well as the 2013 presidential election, and Khamenei has taken off the gloves.
He has given official propagandists the green light to attack Ahmadinejad and his cronies explicitly, portraying them as people who do not believe in the principle of the guardianship of the Shia jurist, the key concept bequeathed by the Islamic Republic’s founder, Grand Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini.
In the official view, Ahmadinejad and his circle lack rationality and wisdom; indeed, they are said to be in the grip of superstition.
There are even rumors that some of them have resorted to witchcraft to summon spirits from beyond the grave, and that Ahmadinejad has had direct contact with the hidden Imam (the Shia messiah).
Likewise, the judiciary, under Khamenei’s control, has accused the vice president, Mohammad Reza Rahimi, of leading an economic mafia, and many of Ahmadinejad’s allies have been arrested or are under investigation.
It is likely that the Guardian Council, which can veto legislation and bar candidates from standing in elections, will use its power to shift the balance in favor of Ahmadinejad’s conservative critics.
The anti-Ahmadinejad camp’s leaders, the brothers Ali and Sadeq Larijani, who head the parliament and judiciary, respectively, will help Khamenei to push the president from the center of power.
But, since Khamenei cannot accept a single, united political faction, it is extremely unlikely that he will let the Larijani camp (which includes Tehran Mayor Mohammad Baqer Qalibaf and former Foreign Minister Ali Akbar Velayati) become powerful enough to win the next presidential election.
Khamenei will likely create a new faction to compete with traditional conservatives after Ahmadinejad’s decline.
This might force him to pick a new face for the next presidential election, someone with little domestic-policy experience and little influence on ordinary people’s lives.
One possible candidate is Said Jalili, Iran’s current nuclear negotiator, or someone like him.
Only those with a strong background in intelligence or the Revolutionary Guards, and a low profile in domestic politics, need apply.
Having full control over the judiciary, the intelligence apparatus, and the military makes Khamenei seem invincible against all political factions or elected officials.
This will lead the regime down an increasingly autocratic path, applying more aggression at home and defying the West with greater self-confidence.
But the concentration of power in the Supreme Leader’s hands poses risks for the Islamic Republic.
And, since he has systematically weakened Iran’s political institutions so that the Islamic Republic itself has come to be identified with his person, his absence will create a vacuum.
Short-term rates have gone so low since the worldwide recession of 2001 - 1% and 2%, respectively, in the United States and the Eurozone, and practically zero in Japan - that a strengthening world economy will force central banks to tighten the monetary reins.
Australia's central bank has already been raising rates since May 2002, and Great Britain's since November 2003.
In the US, the two-day Federal Open Market Committee meeting on June 29-30 is likely to mark a major turning point, reversing the steady decline of the benchmark federal funds rate since Alan Greenspan began loosening monetary policy in 2001.
This is likely to be followed by rate increases in China, the Eurozone, and elsewhere.
Given the tendency of central banks to change interest rates gradually, any change of direction likely means more changes in the same direction later.
What will this landmark change mean for prices of such assets as stocks and homes?
In theory, when interest rates go up, there is reason to believe that asset prices will go down.
The higher interest rates go, the better are investments in bonds, which compete with investments in other assets such as stocks or homes.
Higher interest rates also raise the cost of borrowing to buy these assets, which may diminish demand for them, exerting downward pressure on their prices.
In fact, the history of the stock market's reactions to changing interest rates is mixed.
For example, the NASDAQ stock price index made a spectacular 14% jump upwards on the day (January 3, 2001) when America's Fed began its latest series of interest rate cuts.
But then the NASDAQ index fell 22% over the following year, although the Fed continued to cut interest rates aggressively.
Does that experience suggest that the NASDAQ index will drop sharply if the Fed raises interest rates on June 30?
By contrast, the Fed is widely expected to raise rates at the end this month, so there will be no surprise element.
The market may know, not just from the experience of 2001-2, that interest rate movements do not have predictable effects on stock prices.
But, there are reasons to believe that higher interest rates, even though expected, can have a negative impact on home prices.
That is because home buyers are mostly ordinary people with little financial sophistication, unlike the professionals who trade in stocks.
Home values have soared to high levels in many countries as irrational exuberance grips the markets.
High home prices are already putting great stress on many families, which are struggling to make their mortgage payments.
When interest rates go up, these payments will (when the rate is variable) also go up, possibly becoming unsustainable.
If one borrows the equivalent of three years' income to buy a house, a mortgage rate of 6% means that 18% of one's income goes to interest payments, which may be tolerable.
But if the rate rises to 8%, mortgage interest payments rise to 24%, which, together with amortization, taxes, other debts, and necessary expenditures, may claim too much of the family budget.
Some will then try to sell their overpriced homes, and the resulting market imbalance will cause prices to fall.
People with fixed-rate mortgages are also vulnerable to rate increases, though less directly.
This is because if they have to move and sell their house, there may be no buyers who can afford higher interest payments, unless the home's price also falls.
By contrast, sophisticated investors, such as big stock market players, are unlikely to fall prey to this trap.
But homebuyers are not as savvy, so they may not see the change coming or they may fail to plan for it.
As psychologists have shown, people are susceptible to "wishful thinking bias," wishing away possible future problems that they would rather not think about.
They may overemphasize the likelihood of economic success ("I will be making a lot more money in a few years") and underemphasize the commonplace problems that regularly challenge family budgets ("I will be losing my job or getting a divorce").
They only made it easier for people, in those areas of the world where there is a half-believable story about a fabulous future economy, to indulge their fantasies.
Interest rate increases will deliver a fresh dose of reality: the interest expense of owning a home is going to claim a larger share of family budgets, a hard fact that will eventually sink into our thinking.
But declines in home prices will not occur quickly when central banks begin to raise interest rates.
After two years of rate increases, Australia's home price boom only recently shows signs of abating.
Dominated by amateur investors, home markets do not turn on a dime.
In places where home prices have been rising rapidly, the upward trend may continue or level off for a while.
In most high-priced places, a real decline may not come for some time.
HONG KONG – An anecdote about US President Richard Nixon’s visit to China in 1972 has long been regarded as confirmation of the long view of history taken by Chinese leaders.
Zhou Enlai, Mao’s dutiful number two, is said to have responded to a question about the lessons of the French Revolution by saying that it was too soon to tell.
In fact, according to diplomats who were there, Zhou was discussing not the revolution of 1789, but the 1968 student uprising in Paris, so it probably really was too soon to tell.
After this false start, lessons from the French Revolution have made a comeback in China.
Shortly after the 18th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party in 2012, it was reported that Alexis de Tocqueville’s The Old Regime and the Revolution, written in 1856, had become a “must-read” for senior CCP cadres.
The book’s merits were most enthusiastically touted by Wang Qishan, the man at the helm of President Xi Jinping’s anti-corruption campaign and perhaps Xi’s closest ally.
Toqueville argued that growing prosperity in eighteenth-century France had actually made it more difficult to govern the country.
As people became wealthier, they also became more aware of social and economic inequalities and thus increasingly resentful of the rich and powerful.
The CCP’s just-completed 19th National Congress showed the extent to which China’s leaders have taken Toqueville’s insights to heart.
Xi consolidated his position during his first term, by reversing much of Deng Xiaoping’s legacy, including the opening of China’s economy, the separation of the CCP from government, and a low-key approach to foreign and security policy.
Xi has also swept aside potential rivals, relying primarily on his far-reaching anti-corruption campaign to target officials previously thought to be untouchable.
He has just overseen the largest-ever purge of the CCP Central Committee.
He has cracked down on even the most restrained criticism or signs of dissent, and has even banned Internet jokes, including memes comparing him to Winnie the Pooh.
In another country, such measures might trigger harsh reproach, with critics accusing Xi of turning his country into an old-school Leninist dictatorship.
In China, however, they have drawn praise from observers who believe that Xi is leading the way to the fulfillment of the “Chinese dream” to rejuvenate the country.
But, for some, the dream is on the verge of becoming a nightmare.
Demographic trends are threatening to turn the labor surplus that helped drive China’s rapid growth over the last few decades into a labor shortage at an unprecedented pace.
Water contamination and scarcity, alongside carbon dioxide emissions and lethal levels of air pollution, are imperiling people’s health and jeopardizing the sustainability of China’s economic performance.
Moreover, Chinese GDP growth, while welcome, is being fueled largely by a combination of fast-rising debt and widespread property bubbles.
Even Chinese researchers admit that their country has one of the highest levels of income inequality in the world.
As the poor get poorer and the rich get richer, many are asking if this is what “socialism with Chinese characteristics” really means.
Of course, there is always an optimist around to offer a positive spin.
China owes most of its debt to itself, because political priorities guide lending as much as commercial considerations do.
And Xi’s administration is at least doing something to stamp out the endemic corruption in the CCP.
We should all hope that at least some of what China’s cheerleaders say is true; if Chinese growth collapses, the entire global economy will suffer.
But, even if the optimists are partly vindicated, Xi’s claim that China has found a better way to run a modern society and economy seems far wide of the mark.
To be sure, from the stupefying antics of US President Donald Trump to the damaging rise of populist nationalism in Europe, democratic countries are experiencing their share of trials.
But democratic systems have built-in stabilizing mechanisms that enable them to right themselves without resorting to violence or repression.
For years, there was a serious debate in China about the state’s proper role in economic affairs.
One camp maintained that if the CCP relaxed its grip on the economy, it would inevitably lose control of the state.
Others argued just the opposite: unless the Party ceded more economic control, it would lose political power, as the economy’s contradictions multiplied and development became less sustainable.
But it is not just the Party that Xi is empowering; he is also empowering himself.
In fact, it is hard to know who is ascending the CCP’s commanding heights and who will be struck down for disagreeing with the paramount leader.
This hasn’t deterred outsiders from speculating, but there is not much point in playing that guessing game.
Xi, like any other emperor, will continue to appoint courtiers who follow him wherever he leads.
But with great power comes great responsibility – and, at this point, Xi’s power is virtually absolute.
Xi may be much smarter than Trump (not a high hurdle to clear), but that is not enough to guarantee a stable and prosperous future for China.
There is a reason why dictatorial dynasties tend to end up the same way.
Gerhard Schröders trip to Versailles last week to celebrate the 40 th anniversary of the Elysée Treaty which ended for all time the historic Franco/German enmity and to pose jointly with President Chirac in opposition to a US-led invasion of Iraq, allowed him to appear to be another in an impressive line of powerful post-war German chancellors.
But like the sight lines in Versailles Hall of Mirrors, the image of a powerful German Chancellor is an illusion.
Back home, he is the subject of satirical songs and finds himself engaged in frivolous lawsuits about whether he dyes his hair or spends enough time with his wife.
More importantly, his governments hesitance in addressing the countrys deep problems with its health care system, pensions, and the labor market creates a sense of political paralysis.
Germany seems mired in passivity, as it did in the final years of Helmut Kohls long rule.
But Schröder was elected because he promised to be more dynamic than Kohl.
Schröders failures are less connected with his personal qualities and politics than is often assumed.
Despite the seeming power of Germanys postwar Chancellors, the countrys political system can only be administered; governance in the sense of addressing fundamental problems by enacting far-reaching reforms is usually impossible.
As Germany struggles to restore economic growth this constitutionally mandated debility is increasingly obvious.
The problem stems from the greater influence that ruling parties and parliamentary factions in Germany have relative to their counterparts in, say, Great Britain or France.
If a chancellor is no longer popular Schröders case today he loses leverage over his parliamentary majority.
Schröder won approval for deploying German armed forces to Afghanistan only by attaching the issue to a vote of confidence in his government.
Such a stratagem is possible only in connection with foreign policy matters, and, unlike in Britain, it is the exception, not the rule.
In domestic affairs, no German government can avoid the Bundestags powerful committees and commissions, or force them to behave as the government wishes.
The Bundestag Barons the long serving MPs who rule the legislative committees and enjoy enormous clout within their parties cannot shape politics against the governments will, but they can impede almost everything.
Parliamentary sovereignty in Germany means sovereignty, first and foremost, over the government.
Every German government is essentially powerless vis-à-vis its own parliamentary majority.
It, too, failed to carry out health care and pension reforms even if resistance at that time came from different interest groups.
The problem is structural: members of the Bundestag depend on local or regional party organizations, not on their party leader, for their political survival and advancement within the Bundestags hierarchy.
Once a German Chancellor becomes unpopular regardless of why these party organizations no longer view him as a vote-winner, and the parliamentary majoritys barons will balk at implementing painful reforms, no matter how necessary and beneficial.
The chief source of the barons power is that German governments have nowhere to turn.
Unlike the American President, who may seek votes to support his policies even from the opposing party in Congress, a German Chancellor promises not to govern by seeking the votes of opposition party members.
Moreover, the opposition, is typically always oriented more toward the next election than to providing support on any single issue for the Chancellor, even an issue that it wishes to promote.
Germanys Basic Law bars the government from enforcing laws against the will and decision of a ruling partys statutory bodies.
Party caucuses, decisions of party executive committees, and party congresses assume the status of public institutions with informal authority to block government policy.
The Bundesrat, the upper house where the federal states (Bundesländer) are represented, must approve most laws.
Since the 1970s, no government has maintained a majority in the Bundesrat for very long, with the opposition in the Bundestag gaining a majority in the Bundesrat after mid-term state elections.
As a result, all legislation can be threatened by the oppositions veto, blocking any reform that harms the opposition's constituents.
In short, the parliamentary barons of the governing party buttressed by the ban on seeking opposition support can sabotage legislative projects they dont like.
The coalition partners party institutions may exert massive influence over planned reforms, even to the point of stopping them.
Federalism forms a final barrier to change, by allowing opposition parties to alter, dilute, and reject bills that are detrimental to their clientele.
Konrad Adenauers and Willi Brandts foreign policy achievements created the illusion of the German Chancellors power.
Today, German governance resembles an 18 th century liberal system, with veto rights embedded throughout the decision-making process.
Whatever Schröders own shortcomings and mistakes, they pale in significance for the future of Germany and the EU alike against the weakness of his office.
Currently, the average number of hours worked per person aged 15 to 25 each year in France and Germany is about 50% lower than in the United States.
Other European countries (for example, Italy and Spain) fall somewhere between these poles.
Although some Americans always like to boast about their superior work ethic, this disparity in working hours between the US and Europe has not always existed.
Indeed, until the mid-1970's, the number of hours worked on either side of the Atlantic was roughly the same.
From the mid-1970's on, however, Americans continued working more or less the same number of hours, while Western Europeans began working less and less each year.
If Western Europe needs an explanation as to why its rate of economic growth is lagging behind the US, it need look no further.
• the number of hours worked in a "normal" week, i.e., with no vacation.
Virtually all the difference between the US on one side and France and Germany on the other are due to the first two factors, each with roughly equal weight.
So, lower participation in the labor force explains half of the difference, and longer vacations for those who do work accounts for the other half.
The importance of vacation time should come as no surprise to anyone who has experienced Europe's deserted cities in August, the three-week vacation "bridges" in April and May in France and Italy, the "rush hours" that take place every Friday at 2 PM in German cities, and crowded ski slopes in February due to winter school vacations.
But knowing "how" Europeans work less is one thing; knowing "why" Europeans work less than Americans is another.
One view is that Americans are perceived (and like to see themselves) as Calvinist workaholics, whereas Europeans like to think that they know how to enjoy life's pleasures.
As a European working in the US, I admit that I do take many more vacations than my American colleagues.
A second argument attributes the difference to income taxes, which, in fact, have increased significantly in Europe since the 1970's, while in the US income taxes fell from the early 1980's onward.
They may not change by much the number of hours worked by the main breadwinner in a family (typically a man), but they do influence the participation of women in the labor force.
After all, why work, when your after-tax salary barely pays for childcare and household help?
But even this is not a sufficient explanation, because studies of how the supply of labor responds to tax changes suggest that something else must explain the enormous gap between US and Europe, especially France and Germany.
For the age group over 50, the structure of pension systems is clearly a major factor.
It was and remains much more profitable to retire earlier in Europe than in the US.
Why should a Frenchman or Italian in his early sixties work today, when in the 1990's he could have retired in his mid-fifties with 80% or more of his last working-age salary?
For women, the retirement age in the mid-1990's was even lower.
In the 1980's and 1990's, many European labor unions, in response to rising unemployment, adopted the policy of "work less, work all."
In other words, they obtained shorter hours (i.e., more vacations) in order to keep employment up.
The problem is that total compensation did not go down in proportion to the shorter hours, thus leading to an increase in pay per hour.
Lower productivity and higher unit labor costs eroded firms' willingness to hire, leaving Europe with chronically higher unemployment than in the US.
Today's debates about growth in Europe are full of buzz words like "knowledge-based society," "technological progress," and "investment in education."
Europeans certainly need something to compensate for a short working life with many vacations.
It is more reassuring - and "feels better" - to tell Europeans that growth is sluggish because society is not sufficiently knowledge-based, rather than pointing to the trade-off between vacations and growth.
But I cannot (and do not) then complain if my income does not grow faster and faster.
BOSTON: Few people desire to saddle their children with mountains of debt as an inheritance.
After decades of pushing the costs of today’s expenditures and promises onto future generations, that bit of family wisdom appears - at long last - to be influencing government policy.
Most West European countries lowered budget deficits to 3% of GDP to meet the terms for joining the European Monetary Union.
In the transition countries, belt-tightening is a key part of free market reforms.
So, are future generations now safe from fiscal profligacy now that hard fiscal discipline seems in place?
The problem is that balanced budgets and stable debt-to-national income ratios are poor indicators of generational equity.
Government promises made today but doled out tomorrow, such as social security payments, do not show up in annual budgets.
Nor do standard accounting methods tell us which generation must ultimately pay for government consumption spending.
An innovation called "generational accounting" sheds new light on the issue of generational equity.
"Generational accounting" assumes that all generations, including those not yet born, will receive the same per-capita level of transfers and government purchases.
These two items, plus a country’s net debt, comprise what must be paid for in taxes.
The question, then, is to divide the bill among current and future generations.
Generational balance occurs when a current newborn faces the same tax burden over a lifetime as a representative member of a future generation.
If a future taxpayer is to pay more in net taxes (taxes minus transfers) than a current newborn in order to receive the same level of public goods, then the current generation is not paying for its own consumption but is, instead, imposing debts on its own children and grandchildren.
According to case studies of 17 countries, the world’s leading economic powers (America, Germany, Japan), as well as a wide range of other countries, are pursuing fiscal policies that inflict heavy burdens on future generations.
Japan and Germany are among the countries with extreme generational imbalances, along with Italy, Brazil and the Netherlands.
If future generations in these countries are to receive the same per-capita level of public goods, their net lifetime taxes will be at least 75% higher than the taxes facing current newborns.
Italy’s future generations, for example, can expect to pay 131.8% higher lifetime net taxes if current policies are maintained.
Norway, Portugal, Argentina, Belgium and America all have substantial imbalances, imposing a 50 % to 75% increase in net lifetime taxes for future generations through their current fiscal policies.
In only three countries - New Zealand, Thailand and Sweden - are generational balances negative, meaning that those countries are leaving generations yet born with lower lifetime net taxes than current newborns.
Although annual population growth is positive today in all 17 countries, it will decline dramatically.
By 2030, Germany, Italy, Japan and the Netherlands will be the oldest countries, with over one quarter of their populations elderly.
As a result, the need for government transfers, such as health benefits and state pensions will increase, but the relatively smaller share of working taxpayers in the population will make it harder to pay these charges.
This problem grips the postcommunist countries, where ageing populations are locked in a fiscally fatal combination with bloated Soviet-style pension systems.
If demographics did not play a role, a large majority of countries, including Germany, the United States, Denmark, Italy, the Netherlands, France, Norway, and Argentina would not have generational imbalances; they might even record a surplus.
Relative to demographics, the size of government net debt plays a smaller role in most countries.
The exception here is Belgium, where assuming zero net debt would leave future generations with surpluses.
Do the same in Germany, Italy, Australia and France and you eliminate half the generational imbalance.
These results suggest that future generations can expect serious hardships, problems they would want resolved by those who are causing them.
But current generations, wary of increasing their own tax burdens or curtailing their benefits, may not be willing to tackle these issues.
Failure to act now means permitting each new generation that is born to benefit from the same lifetime net tax rate as current generations.
As a result, generational imbalances - and the lifetime net taxes of future generations - will continue to pile up, until the tax burden will be too heavy to be imposed.
Postponing fiscal reform, besides being blatantly unfair, simply is not sustainable.
Achieving these goals will require that countries pursue some combination of higher taxes and lower government transfers and spending.
It is imperative that policymakers and politicians understand that a balanced budget and stable debt to income ratio in any one year is no indication that future generations will be spared the burden of overspending by today’s generation.
Many countries, particularly in Europe, breathed a sigh of relief when membership in EMU was announced.
WASHINGTON, DC – As Canada, Mexico, and the United States focus on the next round of negotiations on modernizing the North American Free Trade Agreement – a highly uncertain endeavor – governments in the rest of the Americas are grappling with a more fundamental question about trade.
Who will be their dominant trade partner in the future: the US, Europe, or China?
For more than a century, the resounding answer to that question has been, “the US.”
The country’s proximity, soft power, and sheer economic might made it the natural center of commercial attention for Latin America.
And Latin America is the first or second most important trading partner for 37 of the 50 US states.
In 2016, US companies exported a total of $515 billion worth of goods and services to Latin America and the Caribbean – nearly three times as much as they exported to China.
Moreover, whereas the US has a large and recurring trade deficit with China, the country typically posts a surplus with its southern neighbors, which traditionally favor the high-value goods and sophisticated services that US companies provide.
Over the last two decades, Chinese companies have been quietly gaining market share in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The share of US imports in Latin America dropped from 50% in 2000 to 33% in 2016, while China’s share jumped from 3% to 18%.
In many Latin American homes, Chinese-made laptops, smartphones, televisions, and automobiles have replaced legendary US brands.
Of course, this shift is partly a result of the secular factors that have driven China’s rapid growth and global expansion.
But it also reflects China’s long-term strategy to cement its position in one of the world’s most attractive emerging markets.
By 2030, Latin America and the Caribbean will have a combined population of around 720 million people.
According to conservative forecasts, its GDP will amount to around $9 trillion, with just six economies – Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, Colombia, Chile, and Peru –accounting for 86% of that total.
Moreover, countries in Latin America and the Caribbean are moving toward becoming an integrated bloc.
Thanks to a host of agreements, fully 80% of trade among Latin American and Caribbean countries is already tariff-free.
Various trade-facilitation measures, from paperless customs procedures to the harmonization of rules of origin, are steadily dismantling remaining barriers.
The two largest regional blocs – Mercosur and the Pacific Alliance, both of which include the region’s six largest economies – are taking seriously the possibility of convergence.
This trend toward greater regional integration will offer a unique opportunity to tap an entire highly lucrative market from a few beachheads.
Chinese companies that are now making acquisitions and building factories in Brazil, for example, will be able to distribute their products on preferential terms in neighboring countries, while harnessing regional value chains for parts and raw materials.
Like China, the European Union recognizes Latin America’s vast potential as a trading partner.
To be sure, the EU’s share of total Latin American imports has been declining, and now stands at 13.5%.
But it is working hard to reverse this trend, including by completing agreements that cover nearly all of the region’s economies.
And negotiations on a free-trade agreement with the Mercosur countries are in the final stages.
This will put Europe ahead of both China and the US in terms of market access.
But China continues to work hard on many fronts to cement an advantageous position in Latin America, including by pouring large volumes of direct investment into the region.
By some estimates, it has plowed more than $106 billion into Latin America in recent years, including $60 billion in Brazil alone.
Chinese investment has so far gone primarily to agriculture, energy, and mining projects.
But a growing share is now being channeled to manufacturing in sectors that generate higher-wage jobs and transfer much-needed skills to host economies.
In addition, China has become a major underwriter of the new infrastructure that Latin America urgently needs.
It is framing these investments within the narrative of its Belt and Road Initiative, a global vision for connectivity, cooperation, and prosperity that resonates powerfully with Latin American leaders.
As China and the EU seize opportunities in Latin America and the Caribbean, the US continues to cede market share.
Yet this is its neighborhood, and it could easily propose a similar integration initiative here.
And the US certainly has strong incentive to pursue a strategy of active re-engagement with Latin America: the Inter-American Development Bank calculates that if the US were to reclaim the share of Latin American imports that it had in 2000, it could be exporting around $788 billion each year to the region.
Such a strategy could harness the goodwill and enterprise of the 57 million US citizens who have roots south of the Rio Grande, including the 3.3 million US Hispanic-owned firms, many of which are eager to expand overseas.
It might even help to steer the bitter debates over migration and trafficking of drugs and firearms in a more productive direction.
In a time of global uncertainty, a vision of “made in the Americas” prosperity provides a unifying agenda for the continent.
If implemented, the US could reassert its historical leadership among a group of countries that share its fundamental values, as well as an interest in inclusive economic growth and rising living standards.
For months, the senior counter-extremism researcher at the Institute for Strategic Dialogue had obsessively tracked the profiles of more than 130 Western women who had joined the Islamic State (ISIS).
Saltman and her team noticed that instead of journeying through Turkey to reach ISIS headquarters in Syria, the women were heading straight to Libya.
Because women’s roles within ISIS are related mostly to reproduction and consolidating territory, Saltman was able to deduce the reason: “ISIS wasn’t just looking to have combat forces in Libya, but also to build statehood there,” she explained.
To Saltman, investing time and money to think about the differences between men’s and women’s movement in ISIS wasn’t “about gender equality.
Considering the divergent ways men and women might act, think, or respond is not just ticking a politically correct box.
Yet many policymakers in the United States and around the world still don’t seem able to grasp that examining the behavior of women and men alike can improve their analysis and their proposed measures.
New America recently conducted unprecedented research to find out whether and how, after nearly two decades of research, data, and advocacy has crystallized the crucial linkage between gender and national security, US officials consider it when formulating policy.
That’s akin to a nearsighted person choosing to forgo glasses when surveying a new landscape.
Ignoring the impact that gender differences have on policy effectiveness is reckless and risky.
Nearly 80 countries have adopted a National Action Plan to implement United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325, which sets forth a blueprint for engaging women in all aspects of security policy.
But action plans have not translated into active consideration of the gender-differentiated effects of policies.
According to our research, policymakers think they are overcoming their gender blind spot because more women are sitting around the table.
Including more women on decision-making teams, it is assumed, will automatically integrate gender considerations into policy.
Although Germany has a National Action Plan, is 11th on the Global Gender Gap Index (which ranks countries on levels of gender equality), and has a strong female chancellor and its first-ever female defense minister, it still failed at first to consider how its policy might have different effects on men and women.
For example, most government refugee shelters didn’t provide gender-exclusive toilets and showers – a disaster for women from conservative Islamic backgrounds.
Likewise, the intensive language program the government required for migrants didn’t account for women’s inability to attend class without childcare.
Ultimately, such failures made those policies less effective for the entire population, and could lead to long-term security consequences for Germany.
Our interviews also suggest that some policymakers still regard gender-blindness positively: not thinking about the possible gender-specific effects of policies, they believe, contributes to an atmosphere of greater gender equality.
But decades of research have shown that inclusion and equality should not mean ignoring differences between underrepresented groups.
“The consequence of policy is often the same for men and women,” one respondent told our research partners at POLITICO Focus.
I have no idea what that conclusion is actually based on — am I just regurgitating the company line?”
In fact, the consequence of policy often isn’t the same for men and women, in part because they tend to have unequal access to opportunities and resources.
But policymakers often claim an absence of data about different impacts, particularly data that can be mapped onto national security objectives.
“It’s difficult to break things down by gender impact,” one person said.
“Human rights and aid organizations are better at this; our [national security] tools aren’t that granular.
And oftentimes, you’re measuring success anecdotally when it comes to things like gender and education data.”
Data2X, WomanStats, and Inclusive Security are just a few of the many organizations that have made it their mission to gather in global databases this kind of gender-differentiated data and research, providing irrefutable and empirical proof that women’s status is inextricably linked to state power, stability, corruption, prosperity, and many other indicators.
In other words, weak, unstable, corrupt, and poor states are states where women’s status is low.
Most policymakers would draw the conclusion that strengthening and cleaning up government and promoting economic growth will improve the status of women.
In societies where women are treated like second-class citizens, ISIS has an easier time recruiting women with its quasi-female empowerment propaganda, like one image that shows a woman clad in a burqa with the words “Covered girl...because I’m worth it.”
Once women have committed, they may be able to avoid suspicion and pass through security checkpoints more easily; security officials and policymakers still overwhelmingly view women exclusively as non-threatening victims of violent conflicts.
International policymakers need to think about gender, too, in the fight against ISIS – and across all other national-security and foreign-policy contexts.
But it is equally important that all policymakers discuss the women who aren’t there and never will be.
President Hugo Chávez was forced from power not because of opposition protests but because of his own mistakes.
Understanding the positions of the actors is a necessary step if today's impasse is to be bridged.
By 2001's end, a growing but dispersed opposition believed that President Chávez should go but disagreed how this should happen.
Their complaints were many: the government's land reform law, its oil policy, poor record on corruption, politicization and militarization of the public sector, disrespect for unions and other institutions, support for guerrillas in Colombia and for Fidel Castro, illegal arming of militants, hostility to the US, and threats to free speech.
Even though the charges were serious, the opposition lacked a smoking gun to clearly disqualify President Chávez, especially in the eyes of foreign governments.
He would respect their right to say as they pleased but would pull no punches in countering their "lies."
He used his appearances on television to denounce his enemies and mobilize citizens, particularly poor ones, to support his revolution.
The tide of events shifted to favor the opposition and facilitate coordination among its disparate parts, including politicians, business leaders, civil society organizations, active and retired military officials, intellectuals, labor unions and even members of religious groups.
A successful national strike last December convinced many that the president no longer commanded a majority among voters.
Chávez responded with intransigence, seeming to think that his hold on power depended on whether he could still turn out a big crowd.
Like a flawed hero, Chávez fell prey to his aggressive character in ways that endangered his international standing.
In mid-February, the Organization of American States criticized his abusive language in television broadcasts that chilled public debate.
Shortly after, Chávez recklessly decided to consolidate his hold on the state oil company by appointing cronies to its board.
The move sparked a managerial revolt that threatened Venezuela's biggest source of income.
Smelling blood, business and labor leaders called for a national strike to support the company.
Any observer could see that the march of several hundred thousand people on the presidential palace on April 11 th would likely provoke repression and a clash with Chávez supporters.
As violence exploded, Chávez began a television address announcing the shutdown of private television stations; meanwhile the media projected scenes of blood and chaos on one half of the TV screen and afterwards reported that snipers were firing against the defenseless crowd.
Representatives of the armed forces announced that, as defenders of the constitution, they could not support the president.
After announcing that the president had resigned, they charged Pedro Carmona, head of the businessmen's federation, with forming a government.
Many people expected that Venezuela would follow the example of several Latin American countries by respecting constitutional procedures to legitimize a new government.
No one can understand why Carmona abandoned his allies, entrenched a narrow group of associates in his proposed government, or declared himself virtual dictator for a year instead of following the democratic script.
He thus validated the condemnation of Latin American leaders and lost vital military and political support even before he swore himself in.
Arbitrary arrests of Chávez officials began, even as their colleagues regrouped to retake the presidential palace.
The news media suspiciously stopped reporting on these facts, later protesting (too much) that they were under threat and feared instigating further violence.
Unwilling to go to war amongst themselves or against the enraged crowds, the military brought back the president as the only hope for restoring order.
A repentant Chávez sought pardon for his errors, promised generous treatment for the rebels and moved swiftly to negotiate a solution for the oil industry.
The dictatorial turn of the transitional government fortified the view in the Chávez camp that the opposition is a tool of right-wing economic groups and opportunists willing to turn confused citizens into cannon fodder.
For the opposition, the government's attempts to close down the media strips bare Chávez's anti-democratic credentials.
They blame the president for the dead and wounded on both sides and consider him incapable of changing his ways or his policies, despite his promises.
A fragile consensus for conciliation and an independent commission to investigate the facts opens a window for dialogue, but no one thinks the crisis has ended.
Early elections would divert attention from a serious effort to discover what really happened, although a new cabinet and resignations by autonomous judicial and investigative bodies would help restore faith in these key institutions.
They would help Venezuela to let the truth to emerge, no matter what the truth may be.
ALESSANDRIA, ITALY – Tax evasion is a global scourge.
The “black” economy has, by some estimates, reached 10% of GDP in advanced countries and can top 70% in developing countries.
Tax evasion is usually confronted in two ways: audits and harsh sanctions.
But, as the rising tide of tax evasion suggests, these mechanisms amount only to a cat game of and mouse problem – and the mice, it seems, are winning.
As tax evasion becomes more pervasive, whole networks to help hide incomes have appeared, making it far less likely that those who break the law are punished.
Moreover, because more people are evading taxes, tax administrations are under increasing pressure to become more lenient or to accept bribes.
One strategy for weakening ties among potential evaders is to introduce various conflicts of interests.
For example, value-added tax is designed to encourage firms to procure invoices for their inputs in order to reduce their own tax outlays.
But the results often fall short of the potential benefits, because VAT has helped inspire tax evaders to create even stronger networks that can hide an entire chain of transactions.
To encourage customers to request official receipts as proof of payment, some local tax authorities issue a type of receipt that doubles as a lottery ticket.
The receipts can be used as scratch cards to win small amounts of cash, but they also serve as lottery tickets for winning larger amounts.
To prevent forgery, businesses must purchase special, patented machines for printing these receipts.
Records of the printed receipts are automatically transmitted to the tax authorities and are used to calculate taxes.
Another way to reward consumers for combating tax evasion is to offer subsidies.
Some developing countries have introduced a far-reaching VAT refund system for consumers who collect official receipts.
Northern Cyprus, like Turkey, offers a 2.5 percentage point refund on VAT, compared to the standard VAT rate of 13%.
The process of collecting and verifying claims is time-consuming, and the net benefit for taxpayers is low.
Moreover, the method is vulnerable to illicit practices, such as collecting receipts issued to foreigners and students, who cannot claim their own refunds.
Monetary subsidies to consumption are also often granted in developed countries for a variety of purposes, not least of which is fighting tax evasion.
One such subsidy is permitting deduction of a fixed percentage of certain expenses from income tax.
In Italy, expenditures for home improvements have been partly deductible for the past ten years, mainly to improve tax compliance by firms in the housing sector.
New regulations have recently been introduced with the specific aim of cracking down on moonlighting.
Under the 2007 financial law, those who claim the home improvement deduction must supply an invoice from the building contractor, which must specify the cost for labor.
The bulk of claims for the subsidy come from northern Italy, which is usually considered less prone to tax evasion to begin with.
While some cases of illegitimate claims are under investigation, there is no black market for receipts; fraud seems to arise mainly through falsified invoices.
While econometric studies are not available, raw data show an increase in reported income and in the number of firms and official workers.
However, taxable income in the sector is still growing at a slower rate than gross income as measured by national accounts.
When tax evasion is extremely common, taxpayers are likely to experience high transaction and psychological costs in resorting to tax auditors to enforce the issuing of receipts.
But if consumers bear the brunt of costs for reporting violations to the authorities, subsidies may induce them to seek out vendors willing to offer legal transactions.
Whenever a firm chooses to evade, it becomes increasingly difficult to find a vendor willing to engage in legal transactions.
When alternatives become difficult to find, the compensation requested for accepting an illegal transaction falls.
As typically happens in these cases, once a critical mass of tax evasion is reached, it can jump to much larger values.
This process might also explain why, although many reward systems have proven successful at the beginning, their benefits quickly fade.
Of course, there is a risk that subsidies and lotteries may diminish the moral motivation of citizens to obey tax laws, because compliance becomes conditional on some form of compensation.
But if lotteries, subsidies, and other devices fail to control tax evasion, the Chinese have another method: the death penalty.
Europe's leaders have revived the constitutional talks that broke down last December in a dispute about voting rights.
Such disputes are, of course, subject to compromises, which are likely to be found.
What still needs to be settled is a clear understanding of what the constitution is meant to achieve.
Two fundamental principles have underpinned European integration: solidarity and subsidiarity.
Both principles lie at the crossroads of philosophy, politics, economics, sociology, and law.
For years they have been present in the legal and institutional framework of the European Union - in treaties, in the Charter of Fundamental Rights (which quotes them in the Preamble), in the recent draft Constitution.
They are, in short, inscribed in the EU's history and ideals.
Consider solidarity, which is open to at least two interpretations: static solidarity, which concerns only the distribution of income and wealth, and the broader concept of dynamic solidarity, which concerns the production of income and wealth as well.
In the postwar history of European integration, dynamic solidarity was strong in the first period - that of the European Coal and Steel Community - both in its economic development strategy (reconstruction) and in the Treaties, particularly the Treaty of Rome.
This does not mean that dynamic solidarity was subsequently suppressed: European Monetary Union, for example, is an expression of it.
Some countries did not immediately benefit from the euro, but accepted it for the sake of solidarity.
Dynamic solidarity, in other words, means favoring policies that foster investment, innovation, economic growth, and employment.
However, as GDP growth in the EU indicates, dynamic solidarity has been undermined over the last decade.
Realization of the EU's so-called Lisbon strategy, adopted in 2000 with the promise of creating the world's most competitive economy, is threatened by a growing emphasis on static solidarity, reflected in high social welfare costs and the high taxes needed to finance them.
The primacy of static solidarity is due to an aging population, which, along with slower growth, has led to structural fiscal imbalances.
One of the biggest challenges for the future of the EU is addressing today's prevalence of static solidarity oriented towards old people over dynamic solidarity favoring young people.
After all, the Union cannot afford to permit current consumption to continue to prevail over the investment needed to ensure future prosperity.
Subsidiarity is similar to the concept of solidarity in that it, too, has two interpretations: vertical subsidiarity and horizontal subsidiarity.
Vertical subsidiarity concerns the distribution of powers among different levels of government and sovereignty: the EU, national states, regions, and municipalities.
In the European Treaties, we find a clear expression of vertical subsidiarity.
But is this enough to encompass the emerging institutional and constitutional settings of the Union?
Horizontal subsidiarity concerns the responsibility and freedom of human beings, as well as social and economic powers.
But society and the market have their own rights and sovereignties that are not granted by the state.
An example of horizontal subsidiarity is the internal European market, which created a new kind of economic freedom and increased competition between firms because they are no longer protected by national governments.
Horizontal subsidiarity means that in both society and the economic sphere, the state cannot violate individual freedom and responsibility, which must be respected to the greatest possible extent.
It also means that support must be given by a "superior power" whenever individual freedom and responsibility do not suffice to achieve the ends necessary for human dignity.
This support, however, should be implemented in ways that the natural potential of individuals, society, and the market is promoted.
But that is possible only when the role of horizontal subsidiarity is clearly formulated, which it has not been in the European Treaties, the Charter of Fundamental Rights, or the work of the European Convention.
In short, solidarity has come to mean redistribution rather than growth (which is how today's generation expresses solidarity with respect to future generations), while subsidiarity has come to mean the distribution of political power, rather than a careful delineation of the boundaries between the state, civil society, and the market.
Indeed, focusing on market-based growth has often been identified with the semi-alien values of America.
But these values are deeply ingrained in Europe, and should be brought out again.
The EU should restore its economic vitality by pursuing a model of solidarity and subsidiarity that is more balanced in favor of the market and society, and that reduces the state's socio-economic influence.
State institutions should deliver public goods (like defense, justice, and fiscal and monetary policy), society should deliver social goods (like culture, education, and assistance to needy people), and the market should deliver economic goods (which are connected with profits, growth, and employment).
In the 21st century, Europe must reconsider the value of both principles - solidarity and subsidiarity - if it is to attain integration's historic goal: the freedom and well being needed to overcome the differences and political divisions that incited tragedy in the 20th century.
NEW DELHI – Three years ago, as I walked through the densely populated slums of Mumbai toward my new teaching job at a low-income school, India’s extreme educational inequities were starkly on display.
Muddy water flowed alongside ramshackle homes, and the stench of garbage was overpowering.
When I reached the dilapidated school building, students were trickling in for the day in their tattered uniforms.
My dim, musty classroom was cluttered with old cupboards and creaking benches, leaving little room for the students themselves.
Despite this being an English-language school, it quickly became apparent that few teachers – and even fewer students – could speak much English at all.
Indeed, most of my fourth-grade students were unable to recognize alphabets or perform simple addition.
The appalling state of India’s education system – in which 31% of students do not make it past primary school, and a mere 9% complete secondary school – seriously undermines the country’s hopes of becoming a global superpower.
Yet little progress has been made in equipping young people to drive India’s future growth.
Nearly 40% of India’s citizens, almost 500 million people, are aged 13-35 – the world’s largest youth population.
According to the International Labor Organization, the Indian workforce is set to grow by more than eight million annually over the coming decade, largely owing to young people entering the labor market.
By some estimates, almost 25% of the global workforce will be Indian by 2025.
But, in order to harness this demographic dividend, they must be given the skills and opportunities to become productive citizens.
Despite the fractured nature of India’s coalition politics and the country’s arcane regulatory framework, successive governments have launched and expanded myriad programs to improve educational opportunities for children.
The landmark Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan scheme, for example, operates a multi-billion-dollar annual budget for establishing new schools where they are needed, and provides students with free textbooks, uniforms, and a midday meal.
In Mumbai, for example, enrollment rates surpass 95%, but only a small fraction of students graduate.
In a 2001 paper, the economists Geeta Gandhi Kingdon and Jeemol Unni found that India’s education-wage relationship is convex, meaning that economic returns from secondary education are higher than they are from primary education.
But, without a strong foundation at the primary level, secondary-school students find it difficult to succeed, graduate, and reap the benefits.
As with most serious issues in India, the problem is not a lack of high-minded laws, but rather the failure to implement them effectively.
Despite higher government spending on educational infrastructure, inadequate coordination and poor transport mean that a significant share of promised resources fails to reach schools in time for the start of the academic year (or, in some cases, at all).
The surge in enrollment caused by the midday-meal scheme has not been accompanied by an increase in the number of trained teachers, resulting in unmanageably large class sizes and low-quality instruction.
And, although the government has raised teachers’ salaries to attract fresh talent, offering up to $6,000 annually, teachers still lack adequate support and remain unmotivated and largely unaccountable.
Moreover, school curricula, often hijacked by state governments to promote their ideological agendas, are largely inadequate for building skills.
Nevertheless, they culminate in school-leaving exams that effectively decide the course of a child’s life.
But, in making competitive excellence the ultimate barometer of success, India’s education system fails to nurture intellectual curiosity and creativity.
British efforts to reform the education system – including Thomas Macaulay’s initiative to make English the language of instruction – and create a native administration benefited almost exclusively the upper middle classes, whose members already had access to basic education.
In the 1950’s, India’s first prime minister, the Cambridge-educated Jawaharlal Nehru, established several institutions of higher education, notably the Indian Institutes of Technology, to educate more scientists and engineers to compete during the Cold War.
The difficult business of providing quality education to the impoverished masses was largely ignored – one of the greatest injustices that India has experienced in modern times.
As a result, India’s flourishing private sector and dazzling economic growth mean very little to most of its citizens.
Economic gains accrue disproportionately to a privileged minority, while the majority lacks the basic tools – often even literacy – to benefit from the country’s progress.
But their embrace of the free market was accompanied by expanded access to education and health care, making their growth more equitable.
(The political conditions that facilitated these endeavors – whether China’s one-party system or Park Chung-hee’s two-decade-long de-facto dictatorship in South Korea – are another matter.)
Universal access to high-quality education allows all citizens to benefit from economic prosperity.
Without it, lopsided growth is bound to exacerbate the huge cleavages in Indian society.
Equitable progress is the only sustainable long-term solution to India’s entrenched problems – whether corruption, poverty, caste wars, or religious conflict.
For every Indian child deprived of access to education, or who receives low-quality instruction according to an ineffective curriculum, the country’s development is hindered.
Failing to educate our children means wasting their talent and potential – to the detriment of all.
BERLIN – For far too long, the West has harbored illusions about Vladimir Putin’s Russia – illusions that have now been shattered on the Crimean peninsula.
The West could (and should) have known better: Ever since his first term in office as Russian president, Putin’s strategic objective has been to rebuild Russia’s status as a global power.
To this end, Putin used Russia’s energy exports to recover gradually the territories lost when the Soviet Union collapsed a generation ago.
Ukraine has been at the heart of this strategy, because, without it, the aim of a revived Russia is unachievable.
So Crimea was just the first target; the next will be eastern Ukraine and persistent destabilization of the country as a whole.
Before our eyes, the post-Soviet international system in Eastern Europe, the Caucasus, and Central Asia is being overthrown.
Nineteenth-century concepts of international order, based on zero-sum balance-of-power considerations and spheres of interest, are threatening to supersede modern norms of national self-determination, the inviolability of borders, the rule of law, and the fundamental principles of democracy.
As a result, this upheaval will have a massive impact on Europe and its relations with Russia, for it will determine whether Europeans live by twenty-first-century rules.
Those who believe that the West can adapt to Russian behavior, as Putin’s Western apologists suggest, risk contributing to further strategic escalation, because a soft approach will merely embolden the Kremlin.
Indeed, whether or not its leaders acknowledge it, the European Union is now in direct conflict with Russia over its enlargement policy since the end of the Cold War.
That is because Russia’s re-emergence as a global power requires not just the reintegration of lost Soviet territories, but also direct access to Europe and a dominant role there, especially in Eastern Europe.
From a Western perspective, willful confrontation makes little sense, because the EU and Russia are and will continue to be neighbors.
Looking ahead, Russia will need the EU even more than vice versa, because in its Far East and in Central Asia, China is emerging as a rival of entirely different dimensions.
Moreover, Russia’s rapid demographic decline and enormous modernization deficit imply the need for a joint future with Europe.
But seizing this opportunity is possible only on the basis of the rule of law, not of force, and must be guided by the principles of democracy and national self-determination, not great-power politics.
The West’s response will be a new containment policy, mainly taking the form of economic and diplomatic measures.
Europe will reduce its energy dependence on Russia, review its strategic alignment and priorities, and scale back investment and bilateral cooperation.
In the short term, Putin seems to have greater leverage, but the weakness of his position will soon become apparent.
Russia is completely dependent, economically and politically, on its commodity and energy exports, which go primarily to Europe.
Lower European demand and an oil price that no longer suffices to sustain Russia’s budget stand to hobble the Kremlin very quickly.
Indeed, there is reason to believe that Putin may have overplayed his hand.
The collapse of the Soviet Union at the beginning of the 1990’s was caused not by the West, but by a wave of secession, as nationalities and minorities, seeing the party-state weakened, seized the opportunity to break free.
Today’s Russia has neither the economic nor the political strength to regain and integrate the lost Soviet territories, and any attempt by Putin to press on with his plan would impoverish its people and lead to further disintegration – a bleak prospect.
Europeans have reason to be worried, and they now have to face the fact that the EU is not just a common market – a mere economic community – but a global player, a cohesive political unit with shared values and common security interests.
Europe’s strategic and normative interests have thus re-emerged with a vengeance; in fact, Putin has managed, almost singlehandedly, to invigorate NATO with a new sense of purpose.
The EU will have to understand that it is not acting in a vacuum in its eastern and southern neighborhood, and that, for the sake of its own security interests, the conflicting interests of other powers there cannot simply be ignored or, worse, accepted.
The EU’s enlargement policy is not merely some expensive, expendable annoyance; it is a vital component of the EU’s security and outward projection of power.
Perhaps now there will be a reassessment in the United Kingdom of the costs of an EU exit.
And maybe there will be a realization on the Continent that European unification must move forward more quickly, because the world – and Europe’s neighborhood in particular – has turned out to be not as peaceful as many, above all the Germans, perceived it to be.
The EU peace project – the original impetus for European integration – may have worked too well; after more than six decades of success, it had come to be considered hopelessly outdated.
The question of peace in Europe has returned, and it must be answered by a strong and united EU.
BRUSSELS – The euro is celebrating its tenth anniversary against the background of the most difficult economic climate since its birth.
The financial storm that swept in from the United States, and the onset of a severe economic downturn, confronts Europe with unprecedented challenges.
Faced with the biggest test in its history, the euro is far from steering into disaster, as the Nobel laureate economist Milton Friedman predicted ten years ago.
On the contrary, Europe’s Economic and Monetary Union is proving a major asset in these tumultuous times.
Doubters should remember that the euro was itself born out of crisis.
The single currency was conceived as an answer to the upheavals of the postwar period – double-digit inflation, high unemployment, and speculative attacks on the pound, the lira, and the French franc.
It was the crisis of the European Monetary System that drove the euro’s launch on January 1, 1999.
In ten short years, the euro revolutionized the global economic environment, rising to the status of the world’s second currency and rivaling the dollar as a medium for international trade and finance.
The EMU is now the world’s largest market, and continues to grow.
With Slovakia’s entry on January 1, the euro spans 16 countries and 329 million citizens.
The benefits of a monetary union based on a stable macroeconomic framework and governed by an independent central bank are manifest: the euro area has enjoyed low inflation and low interest rates for much of the last decade, a boost in trade and investment, and rapid integration of financial markets.
Moreover, 16 million jobs have been created over the last 10 years – a record more successful than even the US.
Today’s financial turmoil and economic downturn are highlighting the EMU’s advantages in several important ways.
First, the euro has eliminated the possibility of exchange-rate turbulence and speculative currency attacks that more vulnerable economies could have expected in the current turmoil.
As a stable and strong world currency, the euro is also limiting exchange-rate instability globally.
Second, the euro area benefits from an independent European Central Bank whose swift actions to ease liquidity constraints and coordinate monetary policy have recently helped to avert a financial meltdown.
Such rapid, coordinated steps by 16 national central banks would have been unthinkable.
Third, the EMU’s stability-oriented macroeconomic framework has better prepared euro-area countries for economic storms.
Thanks to the fiscal rules of the Stability and Growth Pact, the euro area achieved its soundest budgetary position in 2007, bringing deficits to their lowest levels in 25 years.
Such are the EMU’s benefits that the visible costs of remaining a non-member are beginning to recast the political debate surrounding euro adoption in several countries.
Of course, the euro is no panacea, nor has it functioned perfectly over the last decade.
Divergences between euro-area economies in terms of growth and inflation have been a persistent challenge.
Though differences are no bigger than those found within larger economies such as the US or Germany, they risk being amplified by the crisis.
This is why it is even more important that we continue to improve the EMU’s functioning.
This requires not just reinforcing resilience in the face of crisis, but also equipping euro-area economies for the longer-term challenges of globalization, aging, resource scarcity, and climate change.
In a potentially more volatile twenty-first century global economy, we must reap the maximum benefits of economic integration in terms of growth and jobs.
The key to a better functioning EMU is closer surveillance and deeper coordination of economic policies.
Leaders must start living up to the responsibilities that come with sharing a single currency.
They must recognize the impact that national economic policies have on the euro area as a whole, and thus discuss and coordinate economic programs at the euro-area level.
Here, the launch of the European Economic Recovery Plan – the initiative for an EU-wide fiscal stimulus equivalent to 1.5% of GDP, endorsed by the European Heads of Government in December – constitutes a major step forward.
This must now be followed by closer budgetary monitoring, particularly given that fiscal stimulus measures, the economic downturn, and bank rescue plans will take a toll on public finances.
The Stability and Growth Pact must remain the cornerstone of the EU’s budgetary framework, and effective surveillance and peer support will be vital to help member states work towards balanced budgets once the economy rebounds.
Deeper fiscal surveillance should be matched by broader economic surveillance, especially since current-account imbalances have become more acute during the crisis.
The European Commission is now working on extending the focus of surveillance beyond fiscal policy so that we can identify risks stemming from macroeconomic imbalances or changes in competitiveness and address them before they become entrenched.
Finally, euro-area nations must strive harder to find common positions on international issues and to speak with a single voice in the global arena.
This is the only way to promote and defend the EMU’s economic interests in a world where the challenges are global and overcoming them will increasingly depend on multilateral cooperation.
Agreeing a common position ahead of the meeting gave Europe a greater role.
When the euro area manages to agree swiftly on a coordinated position, this can be instrumental to finding agreement in the EU as a whole and internationally.
It is vital we now build on this success and develop a genuine international strategy for the euro.
The European single currency has been a major success, but it remains a work in progress.
A decade after the euro’s introduction, we must follow the example of its founders and turn crisis into opportunity by uniting in a spirit of cooperation and ambition – and thereby reinforce the EMU’s foundations.
BRUSSELS – European policymakers have decided that they must be seen to be “doing something” about youth unemployment.
A special summit of Europe’s heads of state has been called, and a “Youth Employment Initiative,” proposed at the EU Council of Ministers’ meeting in February, aims to “reinforce and accelerate” measures that were recommended in a “Youth Employment Package” in December 2012.
This activism comes mainly in response to the latest alarming figures on youth unemployment in southern Europe, with sky-high rates of joblessness widely regarded as politically unacceptable.
But there are several reasons to doubt that youth unemployment is a discrete problem meriting special treatment.
The “teenagers” (15-19 years old) should mostly still be in school; if not, they are likely to be very low skilled – and thus to have difficulty finding a full-time job even in good times.
Fortunately, this group is rather small (and has been declining in size over time).
Members of this cohort who are seeking full-time employment have typically completed upper secondary education, but have decided not to pursue university education (or have completed their university studies early).
Second, the data on youth unemployment are based on active labor-market participants.
(Teenage activity rates come close to 50% only in countries like the Netherlands and the United Kingdom, where having a part-time job while in school is very common.)
Labor-market experts thus consider the unemployment rate a potentially misleading indicator, because a youth unemployment rate of 50% does not mean that half of the young population is unemployed.
That is why one should look at the unemployment ratio – the percentage of the unemployed in the reference population – rather than at the unemployment rate.
Indeed, this indicator paints a somewhat less alarming picture than that created by the headline youth-unemployment rate of more than 50% in Spain, or even the 62.5% rate recently reached in Greece.
The youth-unemployment rate in Greece does not mean that close to two-thirds of young Greeks are unemployed.
Only 9% of Greek teenagers are labor-market participants; two-thirds of that number cannot find a job.
Among those in the 20-24 age group, the difference between the reported unemployment rate and the percentage of youth without a job and looking for one (the unemployment ratio) is less stark.
But, even among this age group, one finds that the unemployment ratio is often about one-half of the widely reported unemployment rate.
Looking at the problem this way reveals a completely different picture from the one usually presented.
In those countries where the problem makes the biggest headlines (the eurozone’s south, with Greece and Spain supposedly the worst cases), youth unemployment accounts for less than a quarter of overall unemployment.
By contrast, youth unemployment contributes relatively much more (about 40%) to overall unemployment in countries like Sweden and the UK.
One could argue that the latter two should worry about their youth unemployment more than Spain or Greece should.
The fact that youth unemployment is just a part of a larger problem leads to the real policy question: Why should officials spend limited time, energy, and public funding specifically on unemployed young people, rather than on all of the unemployed?
Does a teenager’s unemployment represent a greater loss to society than that of a single mother or an older worker, who might have been providing an entire family’s only income?
In purely economic terms, one could thus argue that youth unemployment (especially teenage part-time unemployment) is much less important than unemployment among those who are in their prime earning years.
Moreover, young people have the option of continuing their education, thus adding to future earnings power, whereas continuing education is a much less viable alternative for their elders.
Europe has a general macroeconomic problem, owing to demand factors that interact with a rigid labor market, rather than a specific youth-unemployment problem.
This implies that there is no need for ad hoc measures for young people, which merely risk overloading welfare systems with even more exemptions and special rules.
CAMBRIDGE – When the United States’ current account fell into deficit in 1982, the US Council of Economic Advisers accurately predicted record deficits for years to come, owing to budget deficits, a low national saving rate, and an overvalued dollar.
If the US did not adjust, knowledgeable forecasters intoned, it would go from being the world’s largest creditor to its largest debtor.
Many of us worried that the imbalances were unsustainable, and might end in a “hard landing” for the dollar if and when global investors tired of holding it.
Indeed, every year for more than three decades, the US Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) has reported a current-account deficit.
And yet now we must ask whether the US current-account deficit is still a problem.
For starters, the world’s investors declared loud and clear in 2008 that they were not concerned about the sustainability of US deficits.
When the global financial crisis erupted, they flooded into dollar assets, even though the crisis originated in the United States.
Moreover, a substantial amount of US adjustment has taken place since 1982 – for example, the dollar depreciations of 1985-1987 and 2002-2007 and the fiscal retrenchments of 1992-2000 and 2009-2014.
The big increase in domestic output of shale oil and gas has also helped the trade balance recently.
As a result, the US current-account deficit in 2013 had narrowed by half in dollar terms from its 2006 peak, and from 5.8% of GDP to 2.4%.
This is a decline of two-thirds when expressed as a share of global output.
A symmetric adjustment has also occurred in China, via real appreciation of its currency and higher prices for labor and land.
China’s current-account surplus peaked in 2008 at more than 10% of GDP and has since narrowed dramatically, to 1.9% last year.
China’s trade adjustment in some respects followed that of Japan, the original focus of American trade anxieties in the 1980s.
I propose a third, more speculative reason why it may be time to stop worrying about the US current-account deficit.
It is possible that, properly measured, the true deficits were smaller than has been reported, and even that, in some years, they were not there at all.
Every year, US residents take some of what they earn in overseas investment income – interest on bonds, dividends on equities, and repatriated profits on direct investment – and reinvest it then and there.
For example, corporations plow overseas profits back into their operations, often to avoid paying the high US corporate income tax implied by repatriating those earnings.
Technically, this should be recorded as a bigger surplus on the investment-income account, matched by greater acquisition of assets overseas.
The world has long run a substantial deficit in investment income, even though the correct numbers should sum to zero.
Even for officials as highly competent as those at the BEA, it is impossible to keep track of all of the stocks and flows in the international economy.
Everyone knows that errors and omissions are large, especially when it comes to financial transactions.
Underfunding of statistical agencies exacerbates measurement problems, but it does not create them.
Less well known, however, is a particular pattern in the revisions of the US international investment position.
The currently available historical statistics show that in every year from 1982 to 2000, the initial estimate of the net international investment position was subsequently revised upward, as statisticians found overseas assets about which they previously had no way of knowing.
But, despite more frequent surveys of portfolio holdings in recent years, certain new asset acquisitions – for example, some held with foreign custodians – still most likely go unreported.
The reported US current-account deficits from 1982 to 2013, based on subsequent revisions, total $9.5 trillion.
And yet the deterioration in the US international investment position over this period was not much more than half of that amount ($5.7 trillion if measured relative to the revised estimate for 1981).
Certainly a lot of the discrepancy is attributable to valuation effects: since 1982, the dollar value of overseas assets has increased repeatedly, owing to increases in the dollar value of foreign currency and increases in the assets’ foreign-currency value.
But part of the discrepancy also reflects the discovery of missing assets, some of which may have originated in the reinvestment of overseas income.
For example, US multinational corporations sometimes over-invoice import bills or under-report export earnings to reduce their tax obligations.
If true investment income were double what is reported, the difference was reinvested abroad in the years 1982-2000, and those assets were discovered by 2014, that would explain about half of the upward revision in the US net international investment position.
If something like this under-reporting of reinvested earnings or other balance-of-payments credits has gone on in the past, it may still be going on today – especially with US firms becoming aggressive about arbitraging corporate income tax.
And if true investment income is indeed as large as double what is reported, the true US current-account balance entered the black in 2009 and has been in surplus ever since.
NAIROBI – The scale of human suffering currently engulfing drought-stricken Somalia is almost indescribable.
It is difficult to find words to convey the devastation and misery gripping the country, now in the midst of a prolonged period of record-low rainfall.
I have watched emaciated herds of livestock drop, lifeless, into the dust, and been present when people’s futures evaporated in front of their eyes.
But if words cannot do justice to the magnitude of the crisis, they can guide the world’s response.
And in that regard, let me be unequivocal: unless the international community overhauls its approach to delivering aid in Africa, the cycle of suffering will continue.
Millions of Africans, in more than a dozen countries, are facing similar struggles, as failed harvests and persistent conflict fuel severe food insecurity.
By some estimates, East African farmers have lost up to 60% of their livestock – their main source of income – in the first half of 2017.
So many proud and dignified people have been stripped of their livelihoods and forced to rely on one tiny meal a day, or nothing at all.
Worse, these tragedies were avoidable; we knew these crises were coming.
Drought and hunger are slow-motion calamities that, with adequate planning and sufficient resources, can be averted.
But time and time again, humanitarian assistance in Africa has come up short, as it did in Somalia in 2011 and 2012; in Niger in 2005; and in Ethiopia during the 1980s.
Then, as now, food insecurity was predicted long before the first hunger pangs were felt.
As a medical doctor, I am acutely aware of how hunger, malnutrition, cholera, and other drought-related illnesses affect Africans, especially young children and nursing and expectant mothers.
The effects of hunger on physical and mental health can be irreversible, and often keep people locked in a lifetime of poverty.
We must alter this trajectory, before the next crisis strikes, by converting anger into action.
For starters, the aid community must be smarter about how it solicits and allocates resources like food and funding.
Humanitarian organizations like mine have always operated with limited human and financial resources, and have been expected to do more with less.
The United Nations estimates that Somalia, Nigeria, Yemen, and South Sudan will need a combined $6.3 billion this year to avoid widespread famine.
So far, with half the year gone, only about a third of this sum has been raised.
Moreover, and perhaps most important, international aid organizations must rethink how and with whom they work.
More emphasis needs to be placed on building lasting solutions, and that means working more closely with local partners on the ground.
This is not a new idea, but it is a solution that has not yet stuck.
Local actors are best positioned to reach the most vulnerable and marginalized members of any community.
Strong local actors are critical to sustaining services long after multinational aid agencies have turned their attention elsewhere.
Unfortunately, at the moment, only a fraction of international emergency funding goes directly to local agencies.
Worse, there is little dedicated support available for helping local organizations grow and mature.
Because of these shortcomings, multinational organizations often find it difficult to hand over responsibilities once the most urgent needs have been met.
In Somalia, for example, the Somali Red Crescent Society has established dozens of mobile health clinics capable of serving some of the country’s most vulnerable populations.
The Red Crescent, which operates in areas of instability and violence that are often off limits to government health services, has helped reduce the severity of malnutrition and cholera emergencies.
Thanks to funding and training offered by my organization and others, the Somali Red Crescent will provide, on a continuing basis, maternal and child health support, vaccination programs, outpatient clinics, and other forms of community-based health care.
This is just one example of the positive role that local humanitarian actors can play when fully empowered.
Changing the global humanitarian paradigm will not be easy; change on this scale never is.
But the alternative – an endless cycle of hunger, disease, and needless death – is unacceptable.
To help those in Somalia and others suffering from drought in East Africa, please click here.
DIJON – With all of the problems afflicting the world economy nowadays, inflation seems to be the least of our worries.
In addressing the post-2008 economic malaise, which stems from over-indebtedness, policymakers are correct to focus on the threat of debt deflation, which can lead to depression.
But dismissing inflation as “yesterday’s problem” could undermine central banks’ efforts to address today’s most pressing issues – and, ultimately, facilitate inflation’s resurgence.
Understanding how the Great Inflation from the late 1960’s to the early 1980’s was tamed offers important lessons for addressing far-reaching economic problems, however different ours may be, and provides insight into the dangers that may lie ahead.
In the decades following World War II, the doctrine that inflation needed to be traded off against employment – based on the relationship that William Phillips described in 1958 – dominated economic thinking.
But the Phillips curve fared poorly in the 1970’s, when many countries experienced “stagflation” (high levels of both inflation and unemployment).
This vindicated criticism by Milton Friedman and Edmund Phelps, among others, who had already begun to argue that the Phillips curve represented merely a short-term relationship.
If people do not expect inflation, the illusion of increased purchasing power can boost employment and output for a relatively short period.
But once workers realize that real wages have not increased, unemployment will return to its “natural” level consistent with stable inflation.
Later, “new classical” economists like Robert Lucas and Thomas Sargent demonstrated that once people understand that inflation is being manipulated to generate market optimism, the monetary authorities’ actions lose their impact.
These ideas, combined with effective policy practice like that of the US Federal Reserve under Paul Volcker’s chairmanship, led many countries worldwide toward more explicit inflation targeting, in which central banks stabilize inflation expectations by making a credible commitment to a predetermined rate of price growth.
By the 1990’s, inflation was old news in the advanced economies, with much of the developing world soon to follow.
But, in order to stave off the threat of deflation and depression, it is targeting a lower unemployment rate, below 6.5%.
As progress toward that target is made, Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke announced in late May, the Fed will begin to “taper” its program of long-term asset purchases known as quantitative-easing (QE).
In July, Bernanke attempted to calm investors with remarks signaling that, amid inadequate employment gains and persistently low inflation, the Fed would not abandon monetary stimulus anytime soon.
This stance reflects the Fed’s dual mandate, according to which monetary policy targets maximum employment consistent with price stability.
But the credibility needed to anchor expectations is difficult – sometimes even impossible – to achieve when two targets are being pursued simultaneously.
The resulting uncertainty could trigger more volatility, especially in bond markets, potentially impeding economic recovery (for example, by pushing up long-term mortgage rates) or augmenting future inflation risk.
By contrast, the credibility associated with pursuing only an inflation target builds on itself.
Given this, it would be safer and more effective for the Fed and other central banks to pursue a single inflation target, and then use the gain in credibility to aid economic recovery.
For example, a central bank might announce that circumstances during, say, the next two years warrant a doubling of the inflation target from the usual – that is, almost never varied – annual rate of 2%.
Such an approach would reduce the risk of debt deflation, while capping inflation expectations to prevent a damaging surge in prices as recovery takes hold.
Such preventive measures are all the more important in view of the Great Inflation’s second relevant lesson: fiscal discipline is essential to price stability.
Sustaining a high budget deficit over many years will lead to an unmanageable debt buildup, unless that debt is inflated away or restructured.
As it stands, the United States – and presumably the United Kingdom – plans to begin tapering QE when the economy is growing faster, unemployment is lower, and government and household revenues are rising.
But will tax revenues rise fast enough to offset the escalating cost of servicing the government’s mountain of debt?
Even if public debt is not growing as fast as before, the huge volume of existing debt must be repaid.
The best cure would be controlled higher inflation – that is, the aforementioned temporary increase in the inflation target – to erode the real value of public debt and forestall the risk of a much more damaging inflationary shock later, one in which expectations become unhinged.
But, while this approach could work in the US, the European Central Bank is institutionally constrained from raising the inflation target.
Although its pledge last August to purchase unlimited quantities of short-term government debt has calmed markets, activation of the ECB’s “outright monetary transactions” program is conditional on continued fiscal retrenchment.
In this context, the eurozone’s most heavily indebted countries will have to force their creditors to accept a restructuring of public debt.
The preferable alternative would be growth-boosting devaluations – that is, a eurozone breakup.
But if, as seems likely, such devaluations are left too late, debt restructuring might still be needed.
In the coming years, Europe appears set to lurch from the frying pan of depression to the fire of high inflation.
When it does, the lessons of the Great Inflation will suddenly be all too pertinent.
FRANKFURT: Investors and central bankers love the D-Mark.
The German currency is second only to the US dollar as a reserve currency: 15% of the world's foreign exchange reserves are in D-Mark (dollar: 57%).
It is also a sought-after investment currency: Non-German investors hold about 20% of domestic German bonds and 1.300 bn in D-Mark assets.
Their central banks thought to overweigh the D-Mark as a reserve currency.
The Bundesbank estimates that around 35% of D-Mark notes are circulating outside Germany, much of it in Eastern Europe.
Germany is the most important trading partner for many East European and NIS countries.
The D-Mark's popularity is underpinned by its reputation as a hard currency.
Since the inception of the D-Mark in 1948, German inflation has never averaged more than roughly 3%.
The Bundesbank worries about the consequences of the international use of the D-Mark for its monetary policy and for the exchange rate.
Here, the D-Mark's role as an anchor currency within the EMS is at stake.
At the time most EU countries resorted to pegging their currencies to the D-Mark, in the hope of gaining credibility for their efforts to achieve price stability.
The flip side of this coin was that they became hostages to Bundesbank's monetary policies.
By the same token the Bundesbank found itself in the role of Europe's central bank.
Stubborn messages are heard that the Bundesbank’s mandate is about the D-Mark's stability, nothing else.
The Bundesbank, under its new president, radiates a consciousness of being well aware of the external ramifications of its policies.
Given the growing use of the D-Mark in Eastern Europe, and therefore the dependence on decisions taken in Frankfurt, the question as to how the Bundesbank handles the D-Mark's role in the East becomes critical.
In one respect the Bundesbank need not worry: The larger the number and the clout of the countries pegging their currencies to the D-Mark, the smaller the impact of the fluctuations of the US dollar exchange rate on the German economy.
Maybe not for long, though, with the European Monetary Union (EMU) looming on the horizon.
Given its larger scope, the "Euro" may gain even greater importance than the D-Mark as an international reserve and investment vehicle.
Assuming that EMU flies, i.e. that the hard core union including Germany, France, the Benelux, Austria and a few more countries - is realized in 1999, Poland, Hungary and Czech Republic will find that nearly half of their exports will be with EMU countries.
Russia, Ukraine, the Baltics and others in Central Asia as oil comes on line, will see a growing portion of their trade going this way.
This will create incentives in Eastern Europe to use the European currency as an anchor for exchange rate policies and foreign reserve holdings.
The Euro will replace the D-Mark and probably the dollar in citizens' wallets.
But use of hard currencies in transition countries should decrease as national currencies become more stable and convertible.
This will not eliminate the orientation of monetary and exchange rate policies in these countries towards the EMU.
In other words: The future European central bank will have to keep a watchful eye on economic and monetary developments in Eastern Europe.
On the other hand, should EMU fail, rough sailing is ahead for all European currencies.
The D-Mark would, initially at least, appreciate sharply - with dire consequences for German industry, and for the "pegged" and semi-pegged economies who will find themselves clinging to a rocket.
EMU's failure would begin a rough ride for everybody, not least Eastern Europeans.
Trump’s Reckless Tweets vs. Pakistan’s Democratic Hopes
LAHORE – Pakistan has now joined the ranks of countries hit by one of US President Donald Trump’s characteristic tweet storms.
In his first tweet of 2018, Trump declared that the United States has “foolishly” given Pakistan more than $33 billion in aid over the last 15 years, while Pakistan had returned only “lies and deceit” and given safe haven to the terrorists America hunts in Afghanistan.
Like his saber-rattling toward North Korea or his unilateral decision to recognize Jerusalem as the capital of Israel, Trump’s attacks on Pakistan may play well with his base.
But it will also have serious repercussions for Pakistan, where a number of shocks in the second half of 2017 have destabilized the country politically.
And if Pakistan stumbles, the consequences will be felt across South Asia and in other parts of the Muslim world, where a functioning political system in Pakistan could serve as a valuable model.
The roughly 50 Muslim-majority countries stretching from Bangladesh to Morocco have largely struggled to develop politically.
Under President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s leadership, Turkey, which once boasted a functioning democratic system, has been slipping toward authoritarian rule.
Bangladesh, too, seems to be turning into a one-party system, after having made notable headway, particularly on the economic front.
Now Pakistan – in a sense, the region’s best remaining hope – is also facing potentially disruptive setbacks.
Contrary to Trump’s accusations, Pakistan has made steady, albeit slow, progress over the last decade, both in combating terrorism and in consolidating democratic institutions.
That progress began in 2007, when a group of lawyers initiated a mass protest movement in response to an unconstitutional decision by Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan’s fourth military president, to suspend the chief justice of the Supreme Court.
The movement, backed by several political parties, ultimately forced Musharraf to step down in 2008, to avoid impeachment.
In the subsequent general election, the Pakistan Peoples Party won enough seats in the national assembly to form a solid government.
The PPP’s political rival, the Pakistan Muslim League (Nawaz) won a majority of seats in the Punjab provincial assembly, giving it control of the country’s largest province.
After the PPP’s five-year term, the PML(N), led by Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, won the next general election, while maintaining its hold over Punjab.
The transfer of power occurred peacefully, with the PPP moving into opposition.
The still-powerful generals watched these developments from the barracks to which they had retreated.
After more than 60 years of changes in military leadership coming only after coups, the civilian-led government replaced the commander of the armed forces at the end of his term.
This was the third momentous achievement for the rule of law and democratic development in Pakistan, which now seemed to be in a strong position to continue strengthening its political system and institutions.
Its fairly well-developed political parties competed on a level playing field, elections were held when the constitution so required, and transfers of power occurred without violence.
Then, in 2016, the release of the Panama Papers exposed the extent of tax evasion by the world’s wealthy.
Members of the Sharif family, it was revealed, had illegally transferred huge amounts of money into numerous offshore companies, which had then invested in expensive properties in London and the Middle East.
These disclosures opened the way for Pakistan’s own “Arab Spring” moment, with young people rebelling against the elite-dominated political system.
Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf – a political party led by the former cricketer Imran Khan – provided just the platform for that rebellion.
Featuring a platform that includes a focus on justice and good governance, PTI had been gaining ground since the 2008 election, and received a new surge of support from urban youth demanding better services and less corruption.
That is no small cohort: some 75% of people in Pakistan’s large cities are below the age of 25.
Wielding its growing influence, the PTI threatened to call its young supporters into the streets if the Sharif family’s financial dealings were not properly investigated.
Given Pakistan’s history of military intervention in politics – in 1958, 1969, and 1977 – in response to popular protest, the PTI’s threat had to be viewed very seriously.
Pakistan avoided political escalation when the judiciary decided to investigate the Panama Papers’ revelations.
In July 2017, the Supreme Court announced its verdict: Sharif had acted improperly, and could not remain a member of the national assembly, let alone prime minister.
The PML(N) elected Shahid Khaqan Abbasi, a respected cabinet member, as Sharif’s successor as party leader and prime minister.
At the same time, given the fragility of its democratic institutions and the lingering threat of terrorism, the destabilizing potential of Sharif’s removal should not be underestimated.
Trump’s insistence on playing to his nationalist and xenophobic (and, specifically, anti-Muslim) base, instead of advancing the real national security interests of the US, heightens the risk.
Pakistan’s response to its recent political challenges indicates a continued commitment to fight for democracy – a commitment that could serve as a badly needed model for many other Muslim-majority countries.
SEOUL – The commodity super-cycle – in which commodity prices reach ever-higher highs, and fall only to higher lows – is not over.
Despite the euphoria around shale gas – indeed, despite weak global growth – commodity prices have risen by as much as 150% in the aftermath of the financial crisis.
In the medium term, this trend will continue to pose an inflation risk and undermine living standards worldwide.
As China grows, its increasing size, wealth, and urbanization will continue to stoke demand for energy, grains, minerals, and other resources.
For example, the US consumes more than nine times as much oil as China on a per capita basis.
As more of China’s population converges to Western standards of consumption, demand for commodities – and thus their prices – will remain on an upward trajectory.
For example, although the case for copper seems straightforward, given that it is a key input for wiring, electronics, and indoor plumbing, a strong bid for iron is not as obvious, given the Chinese infrastructure boom that already has occurred in the last two decades.
Worst-case estimates have China’s real GDP growing at around 7% per year over the next decade.
Meanwhile, the supply of most commodities is forecast to grow by no more than 2% annually in real terms.
All else being equal, unless China’s commodity intensity, defined as the amount of a commodity consumed to generate a unit of output, falls dramatically, its demand for commodities will be greater this year than it was last year.
As long as China’s commodity demand grows at a higher rate than global supply, prices will rise.
And the rapid economic growth that China’s leaders must sustain in order to lift enormous numbers of people out of poverty – and thus prevent a crisis of legitimacy – places a floor under global food, energy, and mineral prices.
To be sure, intensity of use has fallen for some commodities, like gold and nuclear energy; but for others, such as aluminum and coal, it has risen since 2000 or, as is the case for copper and oil, declines have slowed markedly or stalled at high levels.
As the composition of China’s economy continues to shift from investment to consumption, demand for commodity-intensive consumer durables – cars, mobile phones, indoor plumbing, computers, and televisions – will rise.
There is also the issue of the so-called reserve price (the highest price a buyer is willing to pay for a good or service).
The reserve price places a cap on how high commodity prices will go, as it is the price at which demand destruction occurs (consumers are no longer willing or able to purchase the good or service).
For many commodities, such as oil, the reserve price is higher in emerging countries than in developed economies.
One explanation for the difference is accelerating wage growth across developing regions, which is raising commodity demand, whereas stagnating wages in developed markets are causing the reserve price to decline.
By implication, if nothing else, global energy, food, and mineral prices will continue to be buoyed by seemingly insatiable emerging-market demand, which commands much higher reserve prices.
Ultimately, emerging economies’ absolute size and rate of growth both matter in charting commodity demand and the future trajectory of global commodity prices, with per capita income clearly linked to consumers’ wealth.
If people feel rich and enjoy growing wages and appreciating assets, they are less inclined to cannibalize other spending when commodity consumption becomes more expensive.
Of course, upward pressure on commodity prices also stems from supply-side challenges.
It is not just that global supplies of resources are increasingly scarce, but also that supplies are increasingly falling into inefficient hands.
Around the world, governments are taking greater control of resources and imposing policies that hamper global production and ultimately force prices higher.
(Following the recent fracas surrounding Argentina’s nationalization of Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales (YPF), Australia’s 2012 mining tax on iron and coal companies is a stark reminder that such tendencies are not limited to emerging-market politicians.)
And they can be disastrous to exporting economies, which risk rapid currency appreciation and thus a loss of competitiveness.
Of course, technological advances, like hydraulic fracturing (“fracking”) in the shale-gas industry, could increase supply and therefore lower prices.
But mounting environmental challenges, and the limited availability of commodity substitutes, suggest that a reprieve on commodity prices is not near.
There is a perennial temptation to focus on – even to overemphasize – the short-term, tactical drivers of commodity-price movements, at the expense of giving longer-term, structural factors their due.
While short-term factors – for example, political instability, weather-related disruptions, and speculative activity – are important determinants of prices, they tell only part of the story.
The economic fundamentals of supply and demand remain the key factors in driving the direction of commodity prices and determining whether the commodity super-cycle will persist.
In practical terms, this means that oil prices, for example, are more likely to hover near $120 per barrel over the next decade, rather than $50; and we are unlikely to see a $20 barrel of oil ever again.
BERKELEY – In the online journal The Baffler, Kathleen Geier recently attempted a roundup of conservative criticism of Thomas Piketty’s new book Capital in the Twenty-First Century.
The astonishing thing to me is how weak the right’s appraisal of Piketty’s arguments has turned out to be.
A society’s wealth relative to its annual income will grow (or shrink) to a level equal to its net savings rate divided by its growth rate.
Time and chance inevitably lead to the concentration of wealth in the hands of a relatively small group: call them “the rich.”
The economy’s growth rate falls as the low-hanging fruit of industrialization is picked; meanwhile, the net savings rate rises, owing to a rollback of progressive taxation, the end of the chaotic destruction of the first half of the twentieth century, and the absence of compelling sociological reasons for the rich to spend their incomes or their wealth rather than save it.
A society in which the rich have a very high degree of economic, political, and sociocultural influence is an unpleasant society in many ways.
A society in which the wealth-to-annual-income ratio is a very large multiple of the growth rate is one in which control over wealth falls to heirs – what Geier elsewhere has called an “heiristocracy”; such a society is even more unpleasant in many ways than one dominated by a meritocratic and entrepreneurial rich elite.
As a result, one would expect that it would attract a large volume of substantive criticism.
And, indeed, Matt Rognlie has attacked (4), arguing that the return on wealth varies inversely with the wealth-to-annual-income ratio so strongly that, paradoxically, the more wealth the rich have, the lower their share of total income.
Thus, their economic, political, and sociocultural influence is weaker as well.
Tyler Cowen of George Mason University, echoing Friedrich von Hayek, has argued against (4) and (5).
The “idle rich,” according to Cowen, are a valuable cultural resource precisely because they form a leisured aristocracy.
It is only because they are not bound to the karmic wheel of earning, getting, and spending on necessities and conveniences that they can take the long and/or heterodox view of things and create, say, great art.
Still others have waved their hands and hoped for a new industrial revolution that will create more low-hanging fruit and be accompanied by another wave of creative destruction.
Should that happen, more upward mobility will be possible, thus negating (2) and (3).
But the extraordinary thing about the conservative criticism of Piketty’s book is how little of it has developed any of these arguments, and how much of it has been devoted to a furious denunciation of its author’s analytical abilities, motivation, and even nationality.
Clive Crook, for example, argues that “the limits of the data [Piketty] presents and the grandiosity of the conclusions he draws...borders on schizophrenia,” rendering conclusions that are “either unsupported or contradicted by [his] own data and analysis.”
And it is “Piketty’s terror at rising inequality,” Crook speculates, that has led him astray.
Meanwhile, James Pethokoukis thinks that Piketty’s work can be reduced to a tweet: “Karl Marx wasn’t wrong, just early.
And then there is Allan Meltzer’s puerile accusation of excessive Frenchness.
Piketty, you see, worked alongside his fellow Frenchman Emmanuel Saez “at MIT, where...the [International Monetary Fund’s] Olivier Blanchard, was a professor....He is also French.
Combining these strands of conservative criticism, the real problem with Piketty’s book becomes clear: its author is a mentally unstable foreign communist.
This revives an old line of attack on the US right, one that destroyed thousands of lives and careers during the McCarthy era.
But the depiction of ideas as being somehow “un-American” has always been an epithet, not an argument.
Now, in center-left American communities like Berkeley, California, where I live and work, Piketty’s book has been received with praise bordering on reverence.
We are impressed with the amount of work that he and his colleagues have put into collecting, assembling, and cleaning the data; the intelligence and skill with which he has constructed and presented his arguments; and how much blood Arthur Goldhammer sweated over the translation.
To be sure, everyone disagrees with 10-20% of Piketty’s argument, and everyone is unsure about perhaps another 10-20%.
In other words, there is majority agreement that each piece of the book is roughly correct, which means that there is near-consensus that the overall argument of the book is, broadly, right.
Unless Piketty’s right-wing critics step up their game and actually make some valid points, that will be the default judgment on his book.
No amount of Red-baiting or French-bashing will change that.
Countries that are rich in natural resources are often poor, because exploiting those resources has taken precedence over good government.
Competing oil and mining companies, backed by their governments, are often willing to deal with anyone who can assure them of a concession.
In Africa, resource-rich countries like Congo, Angola, and Sudan have been devastated by civil wars.
Curing this “resource curse” could make a major contribution to alleviating poverty and misery in the world, and there is an international movement afoot to do just that.
The movement started a few years ago with the Publish What You Pay campaign, which urged oil and mining companies to disclose payments to governments.
In response, the British government launched the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI).
Yesterday, three years into the process, the UK convened an important EITI conference in London attended by representatives of governments, business, and civil society.
On the business side, the major international extractive companies have started to acknowledge the value and necessity of greater transparency.
British Petroleum has undertaken to disclose disaggregated payment information on its operations in Azerbaijan, and Royal Dutch Shell is doing the same in Nigeria.
ChevronTexaco recently negotiated an agreement with Nigeria and Sao Tome that includes a transparency clause requiring publication of company payments in the joint production zone.
Nigeria is reorganizing its state oil company, introducing transparency legislation, and launching sweeping audits of the oil and gas sector.
The Kyrgyz Republic became the first country to report under EITI, for a large gold- mining project.
Peru, Sao Tome and Principe, and East Timor are currently in negotiations to implement the initiative.
Equally important, local activists in many of these countries are starting to use EITI as an opening to demand greater public accountability for government spending.
My own foundation, the Open Society Institute, has established Revenue Watch programs in producing countries such as Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Mongolia and Iraq.
Two-thirds of the world’s most impoverished people live in about 60 developing or transition countries that depend on oil, mining, or gas revenues.
The recently published transparency index from Save the Children UK shows that transparency is the exception, not the rule.
There is no reason the major Middle Eastern producers should not be part of this transparency push, and Indonesia should join its neighbor Timor in embracing the EITI.
It is also critical that state-owned companies, which account for the bulk of global oil and gas production, be subject to full disclosure.
Other governments need to follow the UK’s lead and become involved politically and financially in expanding the EITI.
France appears to have done little to encourage countries within its sphere of influence, much less to ensure that its own companies begin disclosing.
The Bush Administration’s recent decision to initiate a parallel anti-corruption process through the G-8 leaves the United States outside the premier international forum for addressing transparency in resource revenues while unnecessarily reinventing the wheel in the process.
Nor have the US and Britain used their power in Iraq to promote transparency in the oil sector.
It is difficult to see how democracy can take root if the country’s most important source of income remains as veiled in secrecy as it was under Saddam.
The EITI still has a long way to go, but it is one of the most effective vehicles available for achieving a global standard of disclosure and accountability.
This week’s summit is an opportunity to assess progress and to define more precisely what it means to implement the EITI by establishing some basic minimum requirements on host countries.
Those committed to seeing the wealth generated by energy and mining finally result in better lives for ordinary people would do well to invest in the initiative during this critical stage.
The EITI may not be a catchy acronym, but in concert with civil society efforts such as Publish What You Pay, it promises to do a lot more good in the world than most.
CAMBRIDGE – It has been a bad few weeks for JPMorgan Chase (JPM), the multinational financial-services firm that by some measures is America’s biggest bank.
Two of its traders were indicted, and the bank agreed to a billion-dollar fine for failing to report the extent of its “London Whale” losses fast enough and accurately enough.
Now it faces even bigger fines – perhaps exceeding $10 billion – for mortgage activities, mostly by two of the financial firms, Bear Stearns and Washington Mutual, that it bought up during the financial crisis.
The conventional wisdom is that the United States government would not have gone after JPM had these setbacks and errors become salient during the financial crisis.
The London Whale trades, for example, were from early 2012; had they occurred in 2008, when the financial system was fragile, JPM, it is said, would have gotten a legal pass.
This view seems well founded, because the government was then propping up the big banks in a concerted effort to overcome the financial crisis.
Weakening the big banks further seemed likely to deepen and prolong the crisis.
So JPM, according to this view, has been unlucky: too many of its legal problems postdate the financial crisis or came to light well after it erupted.
That, however, is not the only way to view JPM’s – and the economy’s – luck.
If the $6 billion London Whale losses had occurred in 2008 instead of 2012, then, yes, the government would not have piled on with fines and criminal indictments.
But what would JPM’s trading partners have done in 2008, when the economy was in turmoil, if the losses hit then?
The financial marketplace was quite wary and tense in 2008, owing to the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the government bailout of mega-insurer American International Group (AIG).
With major financial institutions’ exposure to the previously over-priced mortgage market unclear, financial transactions froze up.
Those who dealt with Citibank, for example, worried about its exposures and losses.
Were they under control, or were they just the tip of an iceberg?
If Citi was facing bigger losses than those already known, could it make good on new obligations to trading partners and lenders?
JPM’s London Whale trades – bets on the future state of the American economy that JPM could not reverse without big losses – were of a type that the bank could readily have made in 2008.
So imagine that JPM had made these kinds of bets during the financial crisis in 2008, realized that they were mistakes, and found that it could not reverse them easily.
JPM then announces a $2 billion loss, and CEO Jamie Dimon calls the problem “a tempest in a teapot” (as he did in 2012).
But the announcement of a $2 billion loss in that setting of economic turmoil would have made JPM’s counterparties jittery.
Was this a big problem in an otherwise sound institution, or was there an iceberg beneath the surface.
After all, AIG was an AAA-rated firm that turned out in late 2008 to have assumed more risk than it could handle.
How can we be sure, market players might have asked, that JPM is not in the same boat?
Now consider how destabilizing it would have been had the same escalating series of announcements that JPM issued in the wake of the London Whale trades come during the financial crisis: It’s not $2 billion, but $4 billion; no, it’s not just $4 billion, but $6 billion.
Had that happened, Dimon would have needed to withdraw his comment that the problem was just a tempest in a teapot, and doubts would have arisen, in the midst of the crisis, about just how good JPM’s well-regarded risk-management practices really were.
In that setting, what JPM called its “fortress” balance sheet would suddenly have looked highly vulnerable, and the bank could have found itself under far more damaging attack than it has in the last year.
And once some traders refuse to deal with a bank, the damage can become self-perpetuating, as losses mount and other traders follow suit.
During the crisis, financiers rightly pointed out that JPM and several other major firms were islands of stability in the financial storm.
But had the London Whale losses occurred then, JPM would not have been on the list of sound financial institutions, undermining confidence further and potentially making the crisis that much worse.
Indeed, JPM runs one of the two major private operations for settling major trades of government debt.
If a shadow falling over JPM from its trading desk had extended to its capacity to settle government debt properly, the economic fallout could have been severe.
Napoleon is reputed to have said that he wanted lucky generals.
No matter how good a leader is, success is not assured and pure chance plays a larger role than many care to admit.
No matter how well managed JPM was, both it and the US economy are lucky that what has befallen it in the last year did not happen – as it well could have – in 2008.
LONDON – In the United States, for people of a certain age, Margaret Thatcher was a superstar, and Americans have been surprised at the sharply divided views on display in the Britain that she governed for 11 years.
Like Tony Blair, Thatcher has long been a British product with more appeal in export markets than at home.
Was she prescient about the problems of European monetary union, or did she leave Britain isolated on the fringes of the continent?
Did she create a new economic dynamism, or did she leave the United Kingdom bitterly divided, more unequal, and less cohesive than before?
Did she destroy the power of vested interests and create a genuine meritocracy, or did she entrench bankers and financiers as the new elite, with disastrous consequences?
Indeed, one issue that has come under the microscope is Thatcher’s reforms of the City of London in the late 1980’s.
In 1986, her government was instrumental in what is known colloquially as the “Big Bang.”
Technically, the main change was to end “single capacity,” whereby a stock trader could be a principal or an agent, but not both.
Before 1986, there were brokers, acting for clients, and jobbers, making a market, and never the twain could meet.
This system had been abandoned elsewhere, and the reform opened London to new types of institutions, especially the major US investment banks.
Beginning with a gin and tonic just after noon, and ending with a Napoleon brandy at three o’clock, lunch prior to the Big Bang was often the most arduous part of a stockbroker’s day.
That cozy culture ended soon after the thrusting, brash Americans, who worked even over breakfast, hit town.
Philip Augar, the author of The Death of Gentlemanly Capitalism, argues that “Good characteristics of the City were thrown out along with the bad,” and that Thatcher’s reforms “put us on a helter-skelter course towards the financial crisis.”
Can we really trace the roots of today’s malaise back to the 1980’s?
Was the Iron Lady an author of the world’s current misfortunes?
Nigel Lawson, Thatcher’s Chancellor of the Exchequer at the time, denies it.
(Full disclosure: I was an adviser to Lawson in the 1980’s).
The Financial Services Act of 1986 put an end to the pure self-regulation regime.
Financial interests opposed it vigorously at the time, viewing it as the thin end of a dangerous wedge, though they could not have guessed just how thick that wedge would eventually become.
It is also difficult to trace back to the 1980’s the origins of the credit explosion and the proliferation of exotic and poorly understood financial instruments that lay at the heart of the 2007-2008 crisis.
The most dangerous trends, including the upsurge of global imbalances and the dramatic financialization of the economy, accelerated dangerously from about 2004 onwards.
Thatcher herself was not an enthusiast for credit, once famously saying, “I don’t believe in credit cards.”
Indeed, she espoused a rigorous philosophy about borrowing: “The secret of happiness is to live within your income and pay your bills on time.”
But perhaps there is a deeper level on which we can see some connections between Thatcherism and the crisis.
Her mantra, “You can’t buck the market,” did contribute to a mindset that led governments and central banks to be reluctant to question unsustainable market trends.
Thatcher was referring specifically to the dangers of fixed exchange rates, and can certainly not be counted as one of the principal architects of the so-called “efficient markets hypothesis.”
But she was a strong believer in the expansion of private markets, and was instinctively suspicious of government intervention.
As the late economist and European central banker Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa once put it, Thatcher “shifted the line dividing markets from government, enlarging the territory of the former at the expense of the latter.”
Padoa-Schioppa regarded this as a factor contributing to the US and UK authorities’ reluctance to step in at the right time before the 2007-2008 crisis.
She remained, to the end, hostile to central-bank independence, regularly rejecting the advice of her chancellors to allow the Bank of England to control interest rates.
She feared that independent central banks would serve the interests of their banking “clients,” rather than those of the economy as a whole.
She was especially hostile to what she saw as the excessive independence of the European Central Bank.
In her last speech in Parliament as Prime Minister, she attacked the ECB as an institution “accountable to no one,” and drew attention to the political implications of centralizing monetary policy, accurately forecasting the dangers of a “democratic deficit,” which now worries many in Europe, and not just in Cyprus or Portugal.
So, in the financial arena, as elsewhere, there is light and shade in the Thatcher inheritance.
Her Alan Greenspan-like belief in the self-correcting features of financial markets, and her reverence for the integrity of the price mechanism, do not look as well-founded today as they did in the 1980’s.
So, in that sense, she can be seen as an enabler of the market hubris that prevailed until 2007.
On the other hand, it is difficult to imagine that a Thatcher government would have run a loose fiscal policy in the 2000’s.
And it is equally unlikely that, had she had her way, the eurozone would be the camel – a horse designed by committee – that it is today.
CAMBRIDGE – On January 20, 2017, Donald Trump will be sworn in as the 45th president of the United States.
I say “sworn in,” rather than “assume the presidency,” because, under Section I of Article II of the US Constitution, Trump cannot actually become president unless he takes an oath of office, publicly committing himself to uphold the Constitution and perform to the best of his ability while in office.
But, given how Trump comported himself during the campaign, it is particularly meaningful in his case.
Until now, Trump has made no effort to behave in an honest or reliable way.
The US does not require any sworn statements from the men and women who run for president, nor does it have any enforceable code of behavior or constraints on the kind of rhetoric that can be used.
This approach is based on the assumption that we can trust the candidates’ judgment.
People seeking the country’s highest office should know how to balance the political imperative of winning votes with a sense of responsibility for the feasibility of – and reasoning behind – their policy promises.
The US has had the good fortune of choosing largely from among presidential aspirants who adhere to generally accepted norms.
During his primary and general election campaigns, Trump lied incessantly about himself, his businesses, his opponents, other countries’ behavior and motivations, America’s electoral system, the size of trade deficits, the actions of the Federal Reserve, and data on everything from labor to crime (to name a few examples).
Moreover, many of Trump’s campaign promises – building a Mexico-funded wall on America’s southern border, bringing back lost manufacturing jobs, deporting millions of illegal immigrants – are patently impossible to implement.
Mitt Romney, the Republican Party’s presidential nominee in 2012, was right when he called Trump “a phony, a fraud,” a candidate whose promises are “worthless.”
But while these traits are clearly problematic, they obviously have not hurt Trump’s political career.
Trump convinced a sizable portion of the electorate to ignore – if not condone – his flagrant policy reversals and lack of knowledge.
Even Romney himself bowed to Trump in the end, meeting with the president-elect a couple of weeks after the election, reportedly in search of a cabinet position.
This has to be one of the most sobering lessons from this past year: outrageous lies and hollow promises can win even the most consequential elections.
And adhering to basic norms of decency – facts can be massaged, but not manufactured, and promises must be plausible, if vague – can lose them.
Trump’s opponent in the campaign, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, learned that the hard way.
During the campaign, Clinton often quoted First Lady Michelle Obama: “When they go low,” she would declare, “we go high.”
But when your opponent goes as low as Trump, “going high” is like choosing, in a classic prisoner’s dilemma, to remain loyal to your partner in crime, who, sitting in the next room, is cutting a deal to testify against you.
When you “go high” in such circumstances, you get what game theorists call a “sucker’s payoff.”
Instead, we must make sure that all candidates adhere to a basic code of conduct.
One simple way to do that would be to demand that all presidential candidates, beginning in 2020, take an oath to be truthful, responsible, and transparent in their campaign rhetoric and conduct.
Testifying in a court of law or before a committee of the US Congress, witnesses “solemnly swear to tell the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.”
Doctors take the “Hippocratic Oath,” pledging first to do no harm.
And Trump will not be alone in taking his oath next month: at around the same time, new members of the US Congress and Trump’s cabinet will make a similar pledge.
Given this reverence for oaths, it is reasonable to assume that taking a truthfulness oath before initiating a campaign for public office would have some impact on candidates’ approach.
There is nothing partisan about this proposal; many Republicans were victims of Trump’s unbridled campaign style before Clinton was in his crosshairs.
The public and the media could use the oath as a tool for assessing – and holding accountable – would-be leaders.
And candidates would stand to gain a competitive advantage against opponents who refuse to take the oath.
While the presidential oath is required by the US Constitution, a candidates’ oath wouldn’t have to be.
Political and market pressure would be enough, if print, television, and social media simply refused to carry campaign advertisements from candidates who refused to take the oath.
For the sake of democracy, we must take action to solidify basic norms of decency and transparency in vital election campaigns.
We can start with the modest step of demanding a truthfulness oath from all future presidential candidates.
WASHINGTON, DC – Last year was an important one for developing countries, if only because the world was reminded of the true value of education there.
Indeed, Malala Yousafzai, the young Pakistani girl who spoke up for children’s right to go to school – even after surviving an assassination attempt by the Taliban – served poignant notice that not educating a child in the developing world is significantly more costly than doing so.
With education squarely in the spotlight, new trends are gaining momentum, many of them merging with “innovative finance” – a concept much beloved by development policymakers and practitioners in difficult economic times.
In particular, the emergence of so-called loan buy-downs could encourage financing for education from reluctant donor countries.
A loan buy-down is a transaction in which a third party pays down part of a loan by softening its terms or reducing the principal outstanding, thereby releasing the borrowing country from all or some of its future repayment obligations.
Because the buy-down is triggered by achievement of a pre-defined target, such transactions promote results-based financing, bringing about quantifiable reforms that otherwise might not have been realized.
Appropriately defined triggers thus address one of the main criticisms of international aid.
They also encourage borrowers to invest in projects with long-run returns that may not be politically attractive, such as teacher training.
Unfortunately, the education sector still lags behind others in harnessing the potential of innovative development finance – and loan buy-downs are no exception.
As a result, the few examples of buy-downs so far have mainly been for health initiatives.
The Partnership for Polio Eradication Project in Nigeria and Pakistan – launched in 2003 by the World Bank, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Rotary International, and the United Nations Foundation – is a prime example of how a buy-down program can concentrate global efforts on a single issue and yield benefits for all parties.
The Bank provided upfront long-term zero-interest loans for the purchase of oral polio vaccines in Nigeria and Pakistan, while the other three organizations covered all service and commitment charges associated with the loans.
At the end of the project – that is, when an independent performance audit determines that the vaccines arrived on time for the campaign, and immunization coverage has reached at least 80% – the partnership will buy down the Bank’s loans.
The World Bank will then cancel the credit and release the recipients from any future liability.
Loan buy-downs could mitigate dwindling flows of official development assistance (ODA) for education in low-income countries, which declined by 10% from 2010 to 2011 – and by 5% for basic education.
The Netherlands led the way, slashing its aid to basic education by 36%, outpacing even the 31% cut by crisis-ridden Spain.
Japan, too, reduced its aid by 30%, while France and Canada cut their assistance by 25% and 21%, respectively.
Elsewhere, the United States lowered its budget by 13%, and Norway by 4%.
Given that the Netherlands has long been a key supporter of basic education, its decision to phase out its education programs was particularly notable.
But, beyond aid reductions, donors may also make it more difficult for borrowing countries to repay the aid funds they owe (this is not limited to loans for education).
And some donors – such as France, Germany, and the European Investment Bank – are lobbying the OECD Development Assistance Committee to count unsubsidized loans as official development assistance to enable them to meet their ODA targets.
This reverses the trend over the last few decades toward grant-based financing, especially for basic education.
But education, a crucial public good, should not be left behind in the pursuit of non-grant-based aid.
Loan buy-downs can help keep the education sector “competitive,” and could prove to be a mechanism to leverage extra resources for education, for which capital-strapped countries may not be willing to borrow otherwise.
Despite the potential benefits, the many unanswered questions about buy-downs limit their application.
With such questions in mind, Results for Development Institute has prepared a study for the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), analyzing the buy-down model’s use in other sectors and considering ways to apply it to education.
The report focuses on which countries have the right combination of basic education needs and borrowing potential.
Moreover, it examines how the buy-down triggers could catalyze results, as well as the operational issues that might arise.
As a next step, the report proposes a pilot program and consultations with borrowers, lenders, and funders to resolve enduring questions about their application.
Buy-downs may prove to be the solution needed to ensure adequate and stable assistance to education in developing countries.
NEW YORK – We live in an era in which the most important forces affecting every economy are global, not local.
What happens “abroad” – in China, India, and elsewhere – powerfully affects even an economy as large as the United States.
Economic globalization has, of course, produced some large benefits for the world, including the rapid spread of advanced technologies such as the Internet and mobile telephony.
It has also reduced poverty sharply in many emerging economies – indeed, for this reason alone, the world economy needs to remain open and interconnected.
First, it has increased the scope for tax evasion, owing to a rapid proliferation of tax havens around the world.
Multinational companies have many more opportunities than before to dodge their fair and efficient share of taxation.
In high-income countries, notably the US, Europe, and Japan, the biggest losers are workers who lack the education to compete effectively with low-paid workers in developing countries.
The 2008 financial crisis started on Wall Street, but quickly spread to the entire world, pointing to the need for global cooperation on banking and finance.
Climate change, infectious diseases, terrorism, and other ills that can easily cross borders demand a similar global response.
Governments should promote high-quality education, to ensure that young people are prepared to face global competition.
And governments should cooperate globally to regulate those parts of the economy – notably finance and the environment – in which problems in one country can spill over to other parts of the world.
The need for highly effective government in the era of globalization is the key message of my new book, The Price of Civilization.
Yet the role of government also needs to be modernized, in line with the specific challenges posed by an interconnected world economy.
I wrote The Price of Civilization out of the conviction that the US government has failed to understand and respond to the challenges of globalization ever since it began to impact America’s economy in the 1970’s.
Rather than respond to globalization with more government spending on education, infrastructure, and technology, Ronald Reagan won the presidency in 1980 by pledging to slash government spending and cut taxes.
For 30 years, the US has been going in the wrong direction, cutting the role of government in the domestic economy rather than promoting the investments needed to modernize the economy and workforce.
They pay for the expensive campaigns of presidents and congressmen, so presidents and congressmen help the rich – often at the expense of the rest of society.
The same syndrome – in which the rich have gained control of the political system (or strengthened their control of it) – now afflicts many other countries.
Yet there are some important signs around the world that people are fed up with governments that cater to the rich while ignoring everyone else.
The upheavals in Tunis and Cairo were first called the Arab Spring, because they seemed to be contained to the Arab world.
But then we saw protests in Tel Aviv, Santiago, London, and now even in the US.
These protests have called first and foremost for more inclusive politics, rather than the corrupt politics of oligarchy.
After three years in which his administration coddled corporate lobbyists, he has finally begun to emphasize the need for the rich to pay more taxes.
This has come late in his term, and he might well continue to favor the rich and Wall Street in exchange for campaign contributions in 2012, but there is a glimmer of hope that Obama will defend a fairer budget policy.
Several European governments, including Spain, Denmark, and Greece, also seem to be moving in the same direction.
Denmark elected a center-left government committed to higher government spending financed by new taxes on the rich.
And Greece has just voted for a new property tax to help close its yawning fiscal deficit.
The European Commission has also called for a new Financial Transactions Tax (FTT) to raise around $75 billion per year.
The Commission has finally agreed that Europe’s financial sector has been under-taxed.
The new FTT might still face political opposition in Europe, especially in the United Kingdom, with its large and influential banking sector, but at least the principle of greater tax fairness is high on the European agenda.
By using high taxes to finance a high level of government services, these countries have balanced high prosperity with social justice and environmental sustainability.
This is the key to well-being in today’s globalized economy.
Perhaps more parts of the world – and especially the world’s young people – are beginning to recognize this new reality.
YOKOHAMA – We live in an era of human-induced climate change.
Though not all of the future consequences are known, the range of realistic outcomes is serious – and a scenario in which there is no impact from climate change is so unlikely that it can safely be ignored.
Others, which require more resources, can be developed as investments that not only provide protection from climate change, but also advance competitiveness, development, and security.
The latest report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, released today, explicitly frames the issue as a risk-management challenge.
This approach facilitates a balanced consideration of likely outcomes as well as those that are less likely but imply much graver consequences.
It also capitalizes on sophisticated tools and approaches already widely used for managing risks in endeavors as diverse as national security, financial planning, and infrastructure design.
The world is warming, and overwhelming scientific evidence confirms that humans caused most of that change over the last few decades.
It is also clear that climate change will continue, at a pace determined by past, present, and future emissions of heat-trapping gases.
Scientific understanding of climate change continues to advance, but there are still areas of uncertainty, including the risks of major surprises, complications, or unexpected interactions.
The effects of climate changes that have already occurred are widespread and significant, affecting agriculture, human health, terrestrial and marine ecosystems, water resources, and some industries.
The effects can be seen from the tropics to the poles, from small islands to large continents, and from the wealthiest countries to the poorest.
But future climate change will affect people, economies, and the environment differently in different places.
Some will confront risks from extreme weather, including stifling heat, intense rains, and powerful storm surges.
Others will face risks of more challenging conditions for agriculture, fisheries, transportation, and other livelihoods.
Risks for human health and security will rise with shortages of food and water.
Along with these risks, a few may benefit, especially from a little warming.
But climate change often will act as a threat multiplier, tipping difficult situations over the edge or narrowing options for solving problems.
While some of the future effects of climate change are nearly certain, others will be surprises.
The first is the climate event or trend – for example, heat waves, heavy rain, or gradual drying.
The second is exposure: how many people and assets are in the wrong place at the wrong time?
Together, these three factors determine risk, which rises with more frequent or ferocious triggering events, more people or assets exposed, or lower preparedness.
Continued high emissions of heat-trapping gases will lead to large amounts of future warming.
Progress in reducing emissions is an important part of responding to climate change, but it is not the whole solution.
It is also essential to make the investments needed to deal effectively with climate change that can no longer be avoided.
These investments are especially important over the next few decades, a period when much of the climate change that we will experience is already baked into the climate system, owing to past emissions and existing infrastructure.
With smart choices, investments over the next few decades to reduce risk can contribute to vibrant societies, robust economies, and healthy environments.
For example, improved emergency services and better transport and communication infrastructure can make streets safer and simultaneously encourage commerce.
Depending on the location, improved flood protection, irrigation technology, or city planning can reduce both current and future risks for people and businesses.
Almost everywhere, better education, preparation, and infrastructure can be parts of approaches that boost economies and strengthen the fabric of society while reducing risk from climate change.
If we are smart and ambitious, addressing those risks can also create real opportunities.
Forty years ago, Israel captured the West Bank, Gaza, and the Golan Heights after a lightning six-day war that repelled the armies of Egypt, Jordan, and Syria.
Today, ending the occupation of Palestinian territories that began that June seems as distant a dream as ever.
The Somalia-like chaos and civil war that is now unfolding in Gaza as a result of this decades-old stalemate can be blamed partly on ill-conceived Israeli policies, and partly on an American administration that, for six long years, relegated the cause of Israeli-Palestinian peace to the bottom of its agenda.
But it is misleading to attribute the failure of the Palestinians to develop an orderly system of self-government only to the pernicious effects of Israeli occupation and American policies.
True, Yasser Arafat was not a model democrat, but his charisma and political acumen were crucial for holding all the Palestinian factions together.
Now, not even Fatah, Arafat’s own party, can claim to be a coherent organization.
Hamas’ electoral victory in January 2006 was to a large extent due to Fatah’s fragmentation under Arafat’s successor, Mahmoud Abbas.
With no effective central authority to inspire fear or respect and the PLO devoid of legitimacy precisely because of its refusal to give Hamas its rightful share in the organization, a grotesquely ineffective brand of “cohabitation” between a Fatah president and a Hamas prime minister has emerged.
As a result, Palestinian politics has degenerated into a naked struggle for the spoils of power.
Last February’s Mecca agreement, which created the Fatah-Hamas unity government, was supposed to establish a civilized system of power-sharing.
The current flare-up is largely due to the fact that Fatah, encouraged by the international community’s boycott of Hamas, never really accepted its electoral defeat and Hamas’s right to govern.
Moreover, since Hamas’s rise to power, Fatah’s challenge to the new Palestinian rulers was enhanced by lavish financial support it secured from the United States and Europe, and by a generous supply of weapons from both the US and Arab countries.
Thus, the current conflict is essentially a pre-emptive war by Hamas – aggravated by lawlessness and banditry, clashing free-lance militias, tribes, and families, and a spiral of senseless massacres – to prevent Fatah from being turned by the international community into a formidable challenger to its democratic right to govern.
It has not shrunk from bombarding Abbas’s presidential compound, attacking Fatah’s command centers, and targeting Fatah military leaders like Rashid Abu Shbak, the commander of Fatah’s internal security and many others, all of them lieutenants of the supreme Fatah military authority in the Gaza strip, Mohamed Dahlan.
Hamas’s determination to assert its authority can be gauged by the desecrated corpses of Fatah fighters, many of them with bullets fired at their heads, a practice dubbed “confirmation of death.”
The rocket attacks against Israeli territory are a transparent attempt to divert attention and rally the masses around Hamas as the true champions of the Palestinian cause.
Tragically, all this is not only about human victims, but also about the Palestinians’ political horizon.
Three times in their history – in 1937,1947, and 2000 – the Palestinians were offered a state, and three times their leaders failed to meet the challenge – admittedly never an easy one for a nation built on such an unwavering ethos of dispossession.
Today, when America finally understands how vital an Israeli-Palestinian peace is for its fortunes in the broader Middle East, and the Arab world is for the first time committed to pursuing a comprehensive settlement with Israel, anarchic Palestinian politics is making a decision for peace well nigh impossible.
However vibrant, Israel’s democracy is not exactly manageable or predictable, either.
But although Prime Minister Ehud Olmert might seek to regain his popular credibility by a major new peace demarche, the two-headed Palestinian Authority, always a dubious partner in the eyes of the Israelis, is now more suspect than ever.
“Every day that goes by only causes more people to wish for the renewal of the Israeli occupation of Gaza.
But that despairing hope, uttered by a desperate Gazan, will not materialize.
Yet, engaged in a war driven by fury and vengeance, the Israelis are now focused again on a manhunt for gang chieftains, targeted killings of Hamas squads, and the arrest of its political leaders, not on peace overtures.
Only a dramatic move by external powers can still save Gaza from becoming a second Mogadishu and both Palestinians and Israelis from a total war that would only breed more rage and desperation.
For the building blocks of a renewed peace process to be sustainable, an international force must be deployed along Gaza’s border with Egypt to prevent the constant smuggling of weapons and isolate the conflict.
Simultaneously, the international community must help make the unity government work by recognizing Hamas’ right to govern in exchange for a performance-based stability plan.
PHILADELPHIA – The course of public debate has become depressingly familiar.
It often begins with a surprise – for example, Donald Trump, the real-estate tycoon turned reality TV star, defies the odds to become the US Republican Party’s presumptive presidential nominee.
All too often, instead of learning lessons, the pundits just continue arguing.
For those who think we can do better, one solution is to make bets on our predictions.
In early 2014, the economists Tyler Cowen and Bryan Caplan did just that.
Cowen was pessimistic about unemployment in the United States, so he bet Caplan that the rate would not fall below 5% during the following 20 years.
Left unchallenged, pundits routinely use vague language, such as “unemployment will remain high for years” or “Trump’s support will slide.”
These sound good on television, but they do not produce an indisputable, testable result.
Bets force the two parties to agree to well-defined terms – making it obvious to everyone who was right and who was wrong.
The purpose of betting, of course, is not to declare winners and losers; it is to replace endless, pointless arguments with a clear determination of whose understanding of reality is closer to the truth.
And yet, unfortunately, when it comes to achieving that goal, betting has consistently failed.
He quickly acknowledged that he had lost, according to the terms of the bet.
Cowen noted that while the unemployment rate had fallen, the employment-to-population ratio had barely budged.
In his evaluation of the outcome, Cowen concluded that, “I feel I’m the one who won the bet.”
Unfortunately, that is what typically happens when people make simple bets on complex debates.
In 1980, the biologist Paul Ehrlich and the economist Julian Simon made another famous wager – on the price of five metals ten years later.
Their bet ended with a clear win for Simon, but Ehrlich shrugged off the outcome as meaningless.
If the two scientists had chosen a different starting year, Ehrlich might well have been the winner.
The problem with bets like these is that they are far too simple to settle the complex debates that underlie them.
A handful of metal prices cannot settle a sprawling Malthus vs. Cornucopia argument, just as a single data point for unemployment cannot be the final word in the dispute between Cowen and Caplan.
Doing so would leave only the squalid food fights into which so many important debates devolve.
The solution is to take bets far more seriously, to expand them, and to design them to be capable of settling debates to the satisfaction of most reasonable observers.
Ideally, a bet would use a question as big as the debate it means to settle.
But that will not work, because big questions – “Will population growth outstrip resources and threaten civilization?” – do not produce easily measurable outcomes.
Cowen and Caplan should not have relied on the unemployment rate alone; they should have included the employment-to-population ratio and other metrics they agreed would have diagnostic value.
Ehrlich and Simon should have made a wider array of predictions, on metal prices, food production, air quality, and other factors.
This approach, using question clusters, could be applied to virtually any important debate.
Right now, for example we are putting the hawks-versus-doves argument about the Iran nuclear deal to the forecasting test.
But if our goal is to learn, that is a feature, not a bug.
A split decision would suggest that neither bettor’s understanding of reality is perfectly accurate and that the truth lies somewhere between.
That would be an enlightening result particularly when public debates are dominated by extreme positions – the clash between Ehrlich and Simon being a classic illustration.
Of course, none of this is possible if those involved are not willing to think together about how to settle their disagreement.
After their famous bet, Simon and Ehrlich considered a second bet involving a large basket of measures; but it never came about, partly because of personal antipathy between the two men.
What is needed is a neutral party and arbiter – a role that think tanks, for example, are well positioned to play.
But, whatever the difficulties, the quality of public debate stands to benefit enormously from well-structured wagers.
When it comes to learning about the world, betting on outcomes beats arguments that settle nothing.
KIGALI – Imagine a country where some 90% of the population is covered by health insurance, more than 90% of those with HIV are on a consistent drug regime, and 93% of children are vaccinated against common communicable diseases including HPV.
In my native country, health care is a right guaranteed for all, not a privilege reserved for the rich and powerful.
Rwanda remains poor, but, over the past 15 years, its health care advances have gained global attention, for good reason.
In 2000, life expectancy at birth was just 48 years; today, it’s 67.
International aid has helped, but our achievements have come primarily from other, non-financial innovations.
For starters, Rwanda has established a collaborative, cluster approach to governance that allows us to achieve more with the same amount of funding.
Moreover, our civil servants embrace problem solving, demonstrating a level of resourcefulness that has produced many localized solutions to human development challenges such as ensuring food security and adequate supplies of clean water and housing.
But perhaps the most important factor behind our dramatic health-care gains has been the national equity agenda, which sets targets for supporting the needy and tracks progress toward meeting them.
Since implementing this approach, Rwanda has managed to decrease the percentage of people living in extreme poverty from 40% of the population in 2000 to 16.3% in 2015
Aside from the obvious benefits, these gains matter because, as UNICEF recently noteda country’s potential return on investment in social services for vulnerable children is two times greater when the benefits reach the most vulnerable.
In other words, Rwanda has achieved so much so fast because we are enjoying higher rates of return by investing in the poorest.
In working toward health equity, Rwanda has made accessibility a top priority.
As of 2016, nine out of ten Rwandans were enrolled in one of the country’s health insurance programs.
The majority of the population is enrolled in the Community-Based Health Insurance (CBHI) scheme, which has increased access to health care for Rwanda’s most vulnerable citizens by waiving fees.
As a result, the reach of health-care coverage in Rwanda is high by global standards – all the more remarkable for a country that suffered the horrors of genocide a generation ago.
Consider the situation in the US: while the rate of uninsured Americans has dropped precipitously under the 2010 Affordable Care Act, the insured face rapid increases in premiums and out-of-pocket expenses.
Perhaps the US should consider adopting a CBHI-type program, to reduce further the number of Americans facing financial barriers to medical care.
Rwanda has crafted health care delivery with access in mind as well, by deploying community health workers (CHWs) to the country’s 15,000 villages.
These local practitioners serve as the gatekeepers to a system that has reduced waiting times and financial burdens by treating patients directly – often at patients’ homes.
The US is brimming with educated young people who, as CHWs, could bridge the gap between medical facilities and patients, thereby improving American social capital and health outcomes.
As Rwanda’s experience has demonstrated, such programs not only broaden access to health care; they also lower overall costs by reducing unnecessary hospitalizations.
Starting in 1997, Brigham and Women’s Hospital supported the HIV+ community of Boston through the Prevention and Access to Care and Treatment (PACT) program.
That initiative was based on the CHW model implemented in rural Haiti by Partners In Health – a non-profit health-care organization that integrates CHWs into primary care and mental health.
As a result of that initiative, the government insurer Medicaid spent less money on hospital stays, and inpatient expenditures fell by 62%.
Other US communities could, and should, incorporate similar models into their treatment programs for chronic conditions.
Innovation is what kick-started Rwanda’s health-care revival, and progressive thinking is what drives it forward today.
For example, health centers established throughout the country provide vaccinations and treat illnesses that village-level CHWs cannot, and have extended obstetrics services to the majority of Rwandan women.
Broadening access further, each district in Rwanda has one hospital, and each region in the country has a referral or teaching hospital with specialists to handle more difficult cases.
While some hospitals still suffer from staff shortages, the government has sought to patch these holes through an initiative that employs faculty from over 20 US institutions to assist in training our clinical specialists.
In just over two decades, thanks to homegrown solutions and international collaboration, Rwanda has dramatically reduced the burden of disease on its people and economy.
As we look forward, our goal is to educate tomorrow’s leaders to build on the equitable health-care system that we have created.
This is the mission of the University of Global Health Equity, a new university based in rural Rwanda that has made fairness, collaboration, and innovation its guiding principles.
As a Rwandan doctor who contributed to building my country’s health-care system from its infancy, I am proud of what we have accomplished in so short a time.
Through continued global cooperation, other countries, including developed ones, can learn to apply it.
PARIS – Mozart’s “Dissonance Quartet” is arguably one of the most beautiful pieces of chamber music ever written.
The title, linked to its highly unusual first movement, describes perfectly the far less beautiful state of French politics today.
A quartet of figures currently dominate France’s political stage: two on the left, François Hollande and Manuel Valls; and two on the right, Nicolas Sarkozy and Alain Juppé.
It is an understatement to say that contrary to the prerequisites of chamber music, they do not play together, but more or less openly against one another.
On the left, catastrophic results for the ruling Socialists in municipal elections in March revealed the depth to which Hollande’s popularity has sunk.
With the Socialists facing a similar drubbing in the upcoming European Parliament election, Hollande had no choice but to install his highly popular interior minister, Manuel Valls in the Hôtel Matignon (the prime minister’s office).
For the first time in the history of the Fifth Republic, power seems to be dramatically shifting away from the Elysée Palace (the seat of the presidency).
The letter and spirit of France’s constitution makes the prime minister the country’s second in command – “my collaborator,” as Sarkozy said of François Fillon – whose key role is to protect the president.
The dissonance on the left, in power since 2012, began as soon as Hollande assumed office.
The far-left denounces his administration’s “social-liberalism,” which is even more clearly pronounced with Valls leading the cabinet.
Despite his many declarations to the contrary, Valls – sometimes described as the “Sarkozy of the left” because of his restless dynamism and, yes, opportunism – really does seem to be in charge.
If Valls succeeds, the triumph will be his, not Hollande’s, reinforcing his transparent ambition to become President himself in 2017.
If Valls fails, his defeat will further weaken Hollande’s chances of winning a second term.
Many on the left, facing only unattractive scenarios, feel increasingly betrayed and dispirited.
On the right, Sarkozy, despite his defeat two years ago, still views himself as the only alternative.
Though he is a consummate politician who is clearly missed by many of his party’s activists, the rest of France’s voters have even more clearly rejected him, mostly over issues of personality, and see no reason to modify their stance.
Overwhelmingly reelected as Mayor of Bordeaux, Juppé, a former prime minister under Jacques Chirac (and once Sarkozy’s foreign minister), has reemerged as the most popular political figure in France, with sympathizers on the left and in the center.
Juppé, whose efforts nearly 20 years ago to impose badly needed reforms made him one of the country’s most unpopular politicians, might be forgiven a bit of schadenfreude.
His age (he is 68) might prove to be a handicap in 2017, but it could also be an advantage: he is the only reassuring statesman-like figure in a quartet whose other members are an uninspiring incumbent and two power-obsessed men in a hurry.
A fifth player, Marine Le Pen, the leader of the far-right National Front, offers the audience a radically different score.
Le Pen is only too happy to capitalize on the succession of petty scandals hitting both the left and the right (attributable partly to the climate of near-civil war prevailing in both camps in recent years).
The latest scandal, for example, cost Hollande a key adviser, who was forced to resign after left-wing media exposed a conflict of interest.
Some segments of the left – who said “No” in 2005 to the proposed European Union Constitutional Treaty – oppose Europe for a combination of social and economic reasons, often resorting to appeals to national sovereignty.
The right is equally divided on the issue of Europe, even if it does not include many anti-capitalists in its ranks.
Like the EU’s leftist opponents, they denounce “diktats” from the European Commission in Brussels and the French government’s acquiescence in them.
Unfortunately, one consequence of these multiple layers of dissonance is becoming all too clear.
The National Front, the only party to present a coherent, united, and purely negative position on Europe, is predicted by many public opinion polls to win next month’s European Parliament election.
If it does, France’s political cacophony will become a problem for Europe as well.
CAMBRIDGE – I have worked for four US presidents, Democrats and Republicans alike, and perhaps the most important thing I have learned along the way is that little of what we call history is inevitable.
What happens in this world is the result of what people choose to do and choose not to do when presented with challenges and opportunities.
George H.W. Bush, the 41st president of the United States, was presented with more than his share of challenges and opportunities, and the record is clear: he left the country and the world considerably better off than he found them.
I was the National Security Council member responsible for overseeing the development and execution of policy toward the Middle East, the Persian Gulf, and Afghanistan, India, and Pakistan.
Bush was kind, decent, fair, open-minded, considerate, lacking in prejudice, modest, principled, and loyal.
He valued public service and saw himself as simply the latest in the long line of US presidents, another temporary occupant of the Oval Office and custodian of American democracy.
His foreign policy achievements were many and significant, starting with the ending of the Cold War.
To be sure, that it ended when it did had a great deal to do with four decades of concerted Western effort in every region of the world, the defeat of the Soviets in Afghanistan, the deep-seated flaws within the Soviet system, and the words and deeds of Mikhail Gorbachev.
But none of this meant that the Cold War was preordained to end quickly or peacefully.
It did, in part, because Bush was sensitive to Gorbachev’s and later Boris Yeltsin’s predicament and avoided making a difficult situation humiliating.
He was careful not to gloat or to indulge in the rhetoric of triumphalism.
He was widely criticized for this restraint, but he managed not to trigger just the sort of nationalist reaction that we are now seeing in Russia.
He overcame the reluctance, and at times objections, of many of his European counterparts and fostered Germany’s unification – and brought it about within NATO.
He viewed Saddam Hussein’s invasion and conquest of Kuwait as a threat not just to the region’s critical oil supplies, but also to the emerging post-Cold War world.
Bush feared that if this act of war went unanswered, it would encourage further mayhem.
Days into the crisis, Bush declared that Saddam’s aggression would not stand.
He then marshaled an unprecedented international coalition that backed sanctions and the threat of force, sent a half-million US troops halfway around the world to join hundreds of thousands from other countries, and, when diplomacy failed to bring about a complete and unconditional Iraqi withdrawal, liberated Kuwait in a matter of weeks with remarkably few US and coalition casualties.
Bush, however, was prepared to order what became Operation Desert Storm even without congressional approval, given that he already had international law and the United Nations Security Council on his side.
Fully aware of what happened some four decades earlier when the US and UN forces expanded their strategic objective in Korea and tried to unify the peninsula by force, Bush resisted pressures to expand the war’s aims.
He worried about losing the trust of world leaders he had brought along and the loss of life that would likely result.
He also wanted to keep Arab governments on his side to improve prospects for the Middle East peace effort that was to begin in Madrid less than a year later.
Again, he was strong enough to stand up to the mood of the moment.
The end of the Gulf War was messy, as Saddam managed to hang onto power in Iraq with a brutal crackdown on Kurds in the north and Shi’a in the south.
A year later, the Bush administration was slow to respond to violence in the Balkans.
It might have done more to help Russia in its early post-Soviet days.
Overall, however, the administration’s foreign policy record compares favorably with that of any other modern US president or, for that matter, any other contemporary world leader.
Bush assembled what was arguably the best national security team the US has ever had.
And with them were Colin Powell, Dick Cheney, Robert Gates, Larry Eagleburger, William Webster, and others of standing and experience.
If, as the saying goes, a fish rots from the head, it also flourishes because of the head.
The US flourished as a result of the many contributions of its 41st president.
“Statistical lives” are what politicians save, or let die, or kill, when they decide on resource allocations for health care.
Health care is not the only area where political decisions are matters of life and death.
Environmental programs to reduce air pollution, educational efforts to publicize the adverse effects of smoking, traffic measures that lower the risk of car accidents: many policies save lives – and omit other lives that would have been saved if the money had been spent otherwise.
So, if you have ever sat at somebody’s deathbed, the answer may very well be yes: you sat at the deathbed of a statistical life.
Even so, we say that John died from cancer, not that he died from a policy decision to stop payment for cancer screening.
We say that Mary died in a car accident, not that she was a casualty of the Road Traffic Act.
In short, we do not usually identify policy decisions as the causes of individual deaths.
This would be quite different if the identities of future victims were known at the time such decisions are taken.
Imagine that they were known, and that the individual victims of policy decisions would somehow stare into the faces of decision makers just as if they were being held at gunpoint.
In fact, the analogy of holding victims at gunpoint is misleading, because in public decision-making we can hardly claim that everything is all right as long as we don’t pull the trigger.
Given that everything that happens is somehow a consequence of decision-making, the distinction between killing someone and letting her die is unconvincing.
So perhaps decision makers, faced with the victims of previous policies and the future victims of current ones, would simply be happy that at last they could allocate resources in an optimally efficient way.
Indeed, the thought experiment of turning statistical lives into identifiable lives highlights an important point about policy-making: much, if not all, of the appeal of “efficient” resource allocation depends on the anonymity of the victims.
Full anonymity explains why efficiency rules – say, leaving the most “expensive” patients untreated when resources are scarce – meet with no protest.
Such anonymity also holds for those who are left untreated in “triage” – the sorting of casualties when natural or man-made disasters strike.
But, for the same reason, efficiency rules often do meet with protest when they are used or proposed for rationing medical services in everyday medicine.
It is part of the everyday life of many citizens – even part of their identities – that they suffer from an expensive health problem.
Under an efficiency regime, they might as well bear a target on their foreheads.
Many statistical lives – your own, perhaps – could be saved by excluding future payment for some expensive medical treatment (say, hemodialysis) for those who are now healthy and reallocating the funds to cheap but effective prevention programs.
Since there is no fairness problem here, would it not simply be irrational to reject efficiency?
Whether or not you see a distinction between statistical lives and individual lives depends on whether you accord value not only to when you die, but also to how you die.
But it is our fate as humans, and it is usually accepted with dignity when the hour comes.
Nevertheless, as long as we see a chance to escape death, we run from it, and we expect those who take care of us to look for the escape routes.
So here is a difference: when you die from lack of medical care, there is an escape route.
By contrast, when you die from the absence of prevention policies, you may be dying sooner than you otherwise would, but you are not being left to die.
This is why sitting beside, and even lying on, the deathbed of a statistical life may be more tolerable after all.
Perhaps a maximally extended life expectancy is of higher value to you than living in a society where doctors do not leave curable patients to die if they cannot pay for the required treatment out of their own pockets.
It all depends on a value judgment – one of the many value judgments societies must make with respect to modern medicine.
The higher the technical capabilities, and the costs, of modern medicine become, the more contested this particular value judgment will be.
PARIS – Relief and pride are the main emotions many French citizens are feeling after the first round of the French presidential election, in which Emmanuel Macron finished first.
For once, the pollsters were right: the two favored candidates – Macron and the National Front’s Marine Le Pen – advanced to the second-round runoff on May 7.
Gone is the sense of anxiety that had attended the weeks, days, and hours before the election, owing to fears that France would wake up to a second-round choice between the far-right Le Pen and the far-left candidate Jean-Luc Mélenchon.
Many observers saw France as economically, socially, and politically vulnerable – even more so than the United Kingdom, the United States, or Germany – to such a choice.
After the UK’s Brexit vote and Donald Trump’s victory in the US presidential election, surely this was Le Pen’s window of opportunity.
Some of us, only half-jokingly, have even mused about where we would flee if Le Pen won.
Between a Great Britain that is leaving the European Union, and a US under Trump, there are few good options.
Fortunately, reason and hope prevailed over anger and fear, and French citizens defied those who warned that populism might triumph in the land of the French Revolution.
While a Le Pen victory is technically possible, the composition of the French electorate makes it highly unlikely.
Very few of Mélenchon’s leftist voters will cross over to the extreme right.
And while some of the center-right candidate François Fillon’s supporters may now vote for Le Pen, it will not be enough to sway the election in her favor.
France’s contrarian electorate has demonstrated to the world – and especially to the Anglo-Saxon world – that one need not betray one’s defining values to defeat populism.
Despite a recent wave of terror attacks, the French have proved their resilience against the politics of fear.
And even with Euroskepticism on the rise, the pro-European candidate, Macron, received more votes than any other.
Without the French Revolution, Napoleon Bonaparte would have remained a junior officer in the French Royal Army.
Similarly, albeit less dramatically, if France’s two main political parties had not collapsed, the 39-year-old Macron, who was unknown to most French voters a year ago, would still be just another economic whiz kid.
Macron looks like a French John F. Kennedy and he campaigned in the mode of Barack Obama.
But he got where he is because the Socialist Party of François Mitterrand is dead, and the conservative Les Républicains are in shambles.
The Socialists, for their part, could not come up with a modern political agenda.
And the Republicans failed to tap another candidate after Fillon became tainted by scandal.
As a result, France, despite its reputation for melancholy, self-doubt, and pessimism, is about to elect its youngest-ever president.
At that point, however, Macron will face a whole new set of challenges, starting with legislative elections that are scheduled for June.
Will Macron end up with a governing majority in the National Assembly, or will the right present a united front and force him into the uniquely French practice of cohabitation?
In France’s semi-presidential system, cohabitation means that the executive branch can become paralyzed if the president and the prime minister represent different political factions.
But Macron wants to prove that he can implement the majority-coalition model followed in parliamentary systems, with an “alliance of the willing,” comprising different but compatible political sensitivities, pursuing a common goal.
To my mind, France is ripe for a coalition government that can transcend increasingly anachronistic left-right political lines.
The real political divide in France, as in so much of the West, is now between those who defend global openness and those who favor a return to nationalist isolation.
Macron will have to acknowledge the cultural roots of traditional left-right divisions, while also addressing the deep-seated, revolutionary anger that now exists in France.
Despite Macron’s strong showing in the first round, some 40% of the French electorate voted for the Euroskeptic candidates Le Pen and Mélenchon.
Restoring these voters’ confidence in existing institutions, and reintegrating them into the political mainstream, will not be easy.
Defeated parties will be tempted to take to the streets and block attempts at reform.
Having failed at the ballot box, they may – in traditional French revolutionary fashion – resort to “the barricades.”
After May 7, he will have to prove that, despite his youth and lack of experience, he can become a great president.
Winning power is one thing; but it is another matter to exercise power effectively, while avoiding the authoritarian tendencies that can emerge under extraordinary circumstances.
Driven by a sense of destiny, he must resist the temptations of Bonapartism.
In the meantime, the democratic world should see Macron for what he is: a beacon of hope in a sea of doubt and despair.
Now watch this explainer on the second round of France’s presidential election.
TEL AVIV – Israel’s persistent occupation of Palestinian lands is irreparably damaging its international standing – or so the conventional wisdom goes.
In fact, Israel currently enjoys a degree of global influence unprecedented in its history, as a slew of new international challenges give its foreign policy, long held hostage by the single issue of Palestine, significantly more room for maneuver.
Recognizing mounting popular opposition to unequivocal support for Israel in the West, Israel has been looking elsewhere for economic, and ultimately political, partners.
From 2004 to 2014, Israeli exports to Asia tripled, reaching $16.7 billion last year – one-fifth of total exports.
Israel now trades more with the once implacably hostile Asian giants – China, India, and Japan – than it does with its leading global ally, the United States.
Neither Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, who visited Israel a few weeks after his reelection in December 2014, nor the leaders of China, now Israel’s third-largest trading partner, bother to link their economic ties with Israel to the success of peace talks with the Palestinians.
Israeli Defense Minister Moshe Ya’alon visited India in February last year, and Indian President Pranab Mukherjee reciprocated with a historic visit to Israel in October.
The election of the Hindu nationalist Narendra Modi as Prime Minister in May 2014 may be accelerating cooperation.
Beyond Asia, Israel is cozying up to Russia, purely on the basis of strategic considerations.
With Russia now setting the geostrategic tone in the Middle East through a show of nineteenth-century-style power diplomacy, Israel has pursued an understanding with the Kremlin concerning the lines that must not be crossed in Syria.
(That understanding was undoubtedly facilitated by Israel’s neutrality on Russia’s annexation of Crimea and arming of separatists in Ukraine.)
Earlier this month, speaking before the Knesset Foreign Affairs and Defense Committee, Israel’s ambassador to Moscow praised the “flourishing in an unprecedented manner” of the bilateral relationship.
Even Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, an irascible interlocutor in the past, is now seeking reconciliation.
Turkey – locked in conflict with Russia, estranged from Egypt and Iran, and pursuing policies on Syria, the Islamic State (ISIS), and the Kurds that clash with those of its NATO allies – has lately found itself increasingly isolated in a sea of chaos.
Having drawn no strategic benefits from the Palestinian cause, Erdoğan finally admitted in January that Turkey needs “a country like Israel.”
Interestingly, that statement came upon Erdoğan’s return from a visit to Saudi Arabia, another key regional actor that maintains discreet security links with Israel on the basis of a similar logic.
For Saudi Arabia, Iran’s escape from global isolation, losses in proxy wars in Syria and Yemen, the specter of an ISIS onslaught, and America’s non-committal regional policies are far higher priorities than the Palestinians.
Other Sunni Gulf monarchies and Egypt are also cooperating with Israel to contain Islamist terrorism and Iran’s regional rise.
Greek Prime Minister Alexis Tsipras, who was fiercely hostile to Israel while in opposition, has become a close ally, having visited the country twice within three months in 2015.
In exchange for gas, defense technology, and military intelligence, Greece is now offering its airspace for Israeli air force training.
Moreover, Greece and Israel are cooperating with Cyprus in creating a geostrategic counterweight to Turkey.
So strong is Greece’s interest in building its relationship with Israel that Foreign Minister Nikos Kotzias has declared that the country will not honor the European Union’s latest guidelines regulating the labeling of goods produced by Israeli settlements in the occupied territories.
No wonder Nabil Shaath, a former Palestinian foreign minister, complained to the Israeli newspaper Haaretz in January about Greece’s “betrayal of Palestine.”
But Greece is not alone in opposing the EU’s new labeling guidelines: Hungary, too, has come out against them.
And, in fact, as Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu edges Israel toward illiberal democracy, he is counting on Eastern Europe’s increasingly illiberal governments to help shield Israel from adverse EU initiatives.
Clearly, Israel faces a multitude of new foreign-policy opportunities, which offer far-reaching potential benefits.
With the Asian giants, Israel lacks the shared global outlook that is essential for a true strategic alliance.
As for the Palestinian question, Israel’s new alliances surely will not help advance a resolution.
On the contrary, they reflect a changing global political agenda that has relegated the question to a lower tier of importance, which is likely to weaken Israel’s incentive to rethink its suppression of Palestine.
As a result, the possibility of a two-state solution is more remote today than at any time since the start of the peace process 25 years ago.
After all, the suppression of Palestine has, and will continue to have, fatally corrosive effects on Israeli society.
Insofar as Israel’s new foreign-policy opportunities allow for the continuation of that suppression, they are not good for Palestine or Israel.
PRINCETON – I get the same question these days wherever I go and from whomever I meet: What do you think of Thomas Piketty?
It’s really two questions in one: What do you think of Piketty the book, and what do you think of Piketty the phenomenon?
By sheer luck, I was among the earliest readers of the English-language version of Capital in the Twenty-First Century.
Piketty’s publisher, Harvard University Press, had sent me the pre-publication galleys, hoping that I would contribute a blurb for the back cover.
I did so happily, as I found the scope, depth, and ambition of the book impressive.
I was of course familiar with Piketty’s empirical work on income distribution, carried out jointly with Emmanuel Saez, Anthony Atkinson, and others.
This research had already produced startling new findings on the rise of the incomes of the super-rich.
It had shown that inequality in many advanced economies has reached levels not seen since the early part of the twentieth century.
But the book goes far beyond the empirical work, and narrates an intriguing cautionary tale about the dynamics of wealth under capitalism.
Piketty warns us not to be fooled by the apparent stability and prosperity that was the common experience of the advanced economies during a few decades in the second half of the twentieth century.
In his story, it is the un-equalizing, destabilizing forces that may be dominant within capitalism.
Perhaps more than the argument itself, what makes Capital in the Twenty-First Century a great read is the sense of witnessing a superb mind grapple with the big questions of our time.
Piketty’s emphasis on the political nature of the distribution of income; his subtle back-and-forth between the general laws of capitalism and the role played by contingency; and his willingness to offer bold (if, to many, impractical) remedies to save capitalism from itself are as refreshing as they are rare for an economist.
So I would have liked to claim that I was prescient in foreseeing the huge academic and popular success that the book would have upon publication.
It is almost 700 pages long (including the notes), and, though Piketty does not spend much time on formal theory, he is not beyond sprinkling an occasional equation or Greek letters throughout the text.
Reviewers have made much of Piketty’s references to Honoré de Balzac and Jane Austen; yet the fact is that the reader will encounter mainly an economist’s dry prose and statistics, while the literary allusions are few and far between.
The book’s argument revolves around a number of accounting identities that relate saving, growth, and the return to capital to the distribution of wealth in a society.
Piketty is very good at bringing these abstract relations to life by hanging real numbers on them and tracing their evolution over history.
Piketty’s pessimistic prognosis rests on a slight extension of this accounting framework.
Under plausible assumptions – namely that the wealthy save enough – the ratio of inherited wealth to income (or wages) continues to increase as long as r, the average rate of return to capital, exceeds g, the growth rate of the economy as a whole.
Piketty argues that this has been the historical norm, except during the tumultuous first half of the twentieth century.
If that is what the future looks like, we are facing a dystopia in which inequality will rise to levels never before experienced.
Yet extrapolation is dangerous in economics, and the evidence that Piketty adduces to support his argument is hardly conclusive.
As many have argued, the return to capital, r, may well start to decline if the economy becomes too rich in capital relative to labor and other resources and the rate of innovation slows down.
Alternatively, as others have pointed out, the global economy may pick up speed, buoyed by developments in the emerging and developing world.
Piketty’s vision needs to be taken seriously, but it is hardly an iron law.
Perhaps the source of the book’s success should be sought in the zeitgeist.
It is difficult to believe that it would have had the same impact ten or even five years ago, in the immediate aftermath of the global financial crisis, even though identical arguments and evidence could have been marshaled then.
Unease about growing inequality has been building up for quite some time in the United States.
Middle-class incomes have continued to stagnate or decline, despite the economy’s recovery.
It appears that it is now acceptable to talk about inequality in America as the central issue facing the country.
This might explain why Piketty’s book has received greater attention in the US than in his native France.
Capital in the Twenty-First Century has reignited economists’ interest in the dynamics of wealth and its distribution – a topic that preoccupied classical economists such as Adam Smith, David Ricardo, and Karl Marx.
It has brought to public debate crucial empirical detail and a simple but useful analytical framework.
Whatever the reasons for its success, it has already made an undeniable contribution both to the economics profession and to public discourse.
Fifteen years ago, the United States was in the midst of what you could call its “Age of Diminished Expectations.”
Productivity gains had stalled, energy prices were high, the backlog of potential technologies that originated in the Great Depression had been exhausted, and waning benefits from economies of scale led nearly every economist to project that economic growth would be slower in the future than it had been in the past.
With productivity growth stagnating for almost two decades, it made sense back then to argue that the US government’s social-insurance commitments (Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid) were excessive and so had to be scaled back.
The intervening years have seen an explosion of technological innovation that has carried America’s general productivity growth back up to its pre-slowdown levels.
Indeed, today the US economy is standing on the brink of biotechnological and, perhaps, nanotechnological revolutions of vast scale and scope.
Social Security’s actuaries may not have fully recognized the impact of today’s technological revolutions, but they have markedly boosted the scale of the system that the US government can afford.
Fifteen years ago, the consensus was that America's Social Security System was in huge trouble, that it needed the equivalent of an engine rebuild.
Today its problems look, as the Brookings Institution economist Peter Orszag says, much more like the equivalent of a slow tire leak: you have to fix it eventually, but it isn’t very hard to do and repair it isn’t terribly urgent.
So why is the Bush administration spending time and energy proposing radical changes to the Social Security System as its signature domestic policy initiative – indeed, as virtually its only policy initiative?
Everyone who worries about America’s weak fiscal position puts Social Security’s relatively small funding imbalance far down the list of priorities.
The highest priority problem is the overall budget’s medium-run outlook, as the Bush tax cuts have opened Reagan-size deficits that threaten to cripple US economic growth.
The second highest priority problem is figuring out what to do in the long term with Medicare and Medicaid.
America must decide the size of its public health programs and how to finance them.
In reality, this is more of an opportunity than a problem: if we did not expect that doctors and nurses will be able to do marvelous things in a generation or two that they cannot do now, we would not be projecting serious fiscal deficits arising from the health programs.
The third most serious problem is to put the US government’s General Fund budget on a sustainable basis, so that the non-Social Security government can finance itself and meet its commitments after the date – around 2020 – when it can no longer borrow from the Social Security Trust Fund.
The bottom line is that Social Security’s long-term funding difficulty, while real, is projected to be much smaller and much further in the future than any of the nearer, larger, and more significant fiscal problems currently facing the US government.
If Social Security is a slow tire leak, then the post-2020 General Fund is an urgent brake job, Medicare and Medicaid are a melted transmission, and the budget deficit is the equivalent of having just crashed into a tree.
What kind of driver, owning a car that has just crashed into a tree, has a burned-out transmission, and needs a brake job, says, “The most important thing is to fix this slow leak in the right rear tire?”
There are three theories as to why the Bush administration is focusing on Social Security.
The first is simple incompetence: Bush and his inner circle simply do not understand the magnitude and importance of the federal government’s other fiscal problems.
For some reason Bush and his people think it is important to undermine the successes of the New Deal institutions established under Franklin Roosevelt.
The third reason is bureaucratic capture: just as the principal aim of Bush’s Medicare Drug Benefit bill of 2003 was to boost pharmaceutical company profits, so the Bush administration’s Social Security proposal will most likely be tailored to the interests of Wall Street.
I don’t see any other, more pressing, reforms – such as raising income taxes to pay for national security – gaining any traction in the Bush regime.
If I had to bet on a cause, I would put my money on sheer incompetence.
After all, that seems to be the common denominator of every policy controlled by his White House.
The global financial crisis is reaching a bottom, and yet political frustration is growing, because the low point of the collapse seems to offer a last opportunity to promote dramatic change, and that opportunity may be missed.
Last year, President Obama’s chief of staff Rahm Emanuel remarked that a good crisis should never be wasted.
Disaster is an opportunity for thinking of ways to make the world fundamentally better – and also prevent future crises.
People do a great deal of thinking, but sometimes they think so much that they come up with contradictory responses.
Indeed, what really makes a crisis profound is precisely the broad variety of differing diagnoses and different remedies.
The political passions aroused by the clashes of interpretation often make the crisis seemingly insoluble.
It was those conflicts, rather than some technical flaw in the operation of the economy, which made the Great Depression of the 1930’s such a dismal and destructive event.
The first type aims at an institutional reordering, so that inefficiencies and perverse incentives are removed, and the economy functions more smoothly and efficiently.
The second, more radical approach, tries to improve not the economy but the way people themselves go about their lives.
No institutional solution is purely neutral in its effects on relative incomes – and it is relative income and wealth around which political debate typically revolves.
Bailout operations invariably bring bitter controversy because they help some but not others.
But the costs must be borne by everyone, including firms that are not rescued – probably because they operate more efficiently – and are put at a competitive disadvantage as a result.
Such rescues, in short, appear to help big companies with bad managers.
Small businesses will always complain that they do not have the organizational clout to extract public funds from governments.
And bank bailouts, involving the direct use of public money to recapitalize failing institutions, are even more costly and politically unpopular.
Advocates of monetary stimulation sometimes argue that it is preferable because it is more neutral in its distributional effects, and that its benefits are spread more widely.
The analogy popularized by the great monetarist economist Milton Friedman was that the central bank could always deal with deflationary problems by dropping money from a helicopter.
But, in the real world, not everyone is underneath the helicopter when it makes the drop.
In fact, it is likely that the helicopter pilot will hover over friends and relatives when dropping the money.
And even if the pilot is completely non-corrupt, the crowd on the ground will always assume that there is some hidden and partisan plan.
That has been precisely the problem with the aggressive provision of liquidity, quantitative easing, and the reduction of central bank interest rates used to address the current crisis.
In today’s credit crunch, as in the Great Depression, central banks lend at practically zero interest rates.
But when businesses and consumers try to borrow, they find that it is very costly, if not impossible.
Lenders (the bankers) are suspicious, worried about creditworthiness, and demand high risk premia.
In practice, it is only banks that have access to cheap borrowing, so they can reconstitute their balance sheets by borrowing cheaply and lending expensively.
But the contrast between bank profitability and the woes of everyone else turns up the political heat on the central banks, which have to explain why it is only their “friends,” the banks, who are standing under the helicopter when it drops money.
Frustration with the complexities of trying to provide ready fixes leads to attempts to find even more radical solutions.
Some try to deal with basic human proclivities, and to modify behavior to make people better.
It is in times of crisis that Utopian ideas about ways of guaranteeing human happiness flourish, often claiming some scientific basis.
For example, long before the financial collapse, experimental economists joined psychologists in attempting to measure varying propensities to greediness.
Some evidence suggests that there is a link between the level of dopamine, addiction, and greedy behavior.
Since a common diagnosis of the problems generated in the financial services business holds that human greed is to blame, a German think tank recently suggested that people with a genetic proclivity to high dopamine levels should be barred from taking leading positions in financial institutions.
But such apparently attractive strategies aimed at making better people turn out to be exclusionary – and based on rather arbitrary testing.
If implemented, the German proposal would most likely exclude behavior that involves acceptable risk, as well as sidelining those who take wild and inappropriate decisions.
Both the institutional and the behavioral responses to a crisis are fundamentally problematical.
The search for technical solutions leads to political polarization, and may produce stalemate.
The search for deep human roots of the crisis, by contrast, leads to attempts to change human nature, which are futile – and also inherently much more dangerous.
LONDON – Some 236 years ago, a young governor from the American state of Virginia broke the mold on education reform.
In his Bill for the More General Diffusion of Knowledge, Thomas Jefferson called for “a system of general instruction” that would reach all citizens, “from the richest to poorest.”
It was the first step in the creation of the American system of public education – an institution that helped to propel the country’s rise to global prominence.
By the early twentieth century, the United States was a global leader in public schooling.
Investments in education provided a catalyst for economic growth, job creation, and increased social mobility.
As Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz have shown, it was American “exceptionalism” in education that enabled the country to steal a march on European countries that were under-investing in human capital.
As world leaders gather this week for the Oslo Summit on Education for Development, the lessons from this experience could not be more relevant.
In fact, with the global economy becoming increasingly knowledge-based, the education and skills of a country’s people are more important than ever in securing its future.
Countries that fail to build inclusive education systems face the prospect of sluggish growth, rising inequality, and lost opportunities in world trade.
In this context, some of today’s discussions on education sound curiously anachronistic.
Harvard economist Ricardo Hausmann recently berated what he describes as the “education, education, education crowd” for advocating an “education-only” strategy for growth.
It was an impressive attack on a view that, to the best of my knowledge, nobody holds.
Expanding education in countries where institutional failure, poor governance, and macro-economic mismanagement stymie investment is a prescription for low productivity and high unemployment.
In North Africa, the disharmony between the education system and the job market left young, educated people without decent opportunities – a situation that contributed to the revolutions of the Arab Spring.
None of this detracts from the vital role of education – not just years of schooling, but genuine learning – as an essential component of growth.
Extensive research – from the work of Adam Smith to Robert Solow and Gary Becker and, most recently, Eric Hanushek – confirms the importance of learning in building productive human capital.
One step up the standard deviation score on the OECD’s Program for International Student Assessment is associated with a 2% increase in a country’s long-run per capita growth rate.
But try naming a country that has sustained an economic transformation without advances in education.
Economists at the World Bank have contributed a few straw men of their own to the education debate.
In one contribution, Shanta Devarajan criticizes the view that education is an essential public good that governments should finance and deliver, arguing that it should instead be considered a private good, delivered through markets to customers – that is, parents and children – seeking private returns.
The problem is that education is self-evidently not a public good – in the real world, few things are.
It is, however, a “merit” good, something that governments should offer for free, because of the wide-ranging private and social returns that might be lost if parents underinvest, or if the poor are excluded.
For example, progress in education – especially girls’ education – is closely associated with improvements in child survival and nutrition, and maternal health, as well as higher wages.
It is time to move beyond futile discussions based on flawed logic to focus on the real challenges in education – challenges that must be addressed, if we are to meet the Sustainable Development Goal of delivering high-quality primary and secondary education to all by 2030.
With 59 million primary school-age children and 65 million adolescents out of school, that opportunity should be seized with both hands.
One background paper for the summit highlights the failure of successive governments in Pakistan, which now has the world’s second-largest out-of-school population, to invest in education.
At the heart of the problem are politicians who are more interested in facilitating tax evasion by the wealthy than improving learning opportunities for the poor.
Even with an enhanced resource-mobilization effort, roughly $22 billion annually in aid will be needed to achieve universal lower-secondary education.
Beyond closing the aid gap, United Nations Special Envoy on Education Gordon Brown has rightly called for financing mechanisms to deliver education to children affected by conflict and humanitarian emergencies.
Every government should be setting targets aimed explicitly at narrowing education disparities – linked to gender, wealth, and the rural-urban divide – and aligning their budgets with those targets.
In Nigeria, for example, urban boys from the wealthiest 20% of households average ten years of schooling, while poor rural girls in northern areas can expect less than two years.
Yet, as another Oslo summit background paper shows, education finance is skewed toward the wealthy in most countries.
Finally, governments and aid agencies must abandon market-based experiments, and commit to genuine system-wide reform.
One key priority area is teachers, who need strong incentives, effective training, and dependable support systems to deliver real learning.
As world leaders gather in Oslo, millions of parents will be struggling to ensure that their children receive the education they deserve – one that will enable them to build better lives for themselves and their families.
CAMBRIDGE – As US President-elect Donald Trump prepares his administration’s policy toward China, he should be wary of two major traps that history has set for him.
The “Thucydides Trap,” cited by Chinese President Xi Jinping, refers to the warning by the ancient Greek historian that cataclysmic war can erupt if an established power (like the United States) becomes too fearful of a rising power (like China).
But Trump also has to worry about the “Kindleberger Trap”: a China that seems too weak rather than too strong.
Charles Kindleberger, an intellectual architect of the Marshall Plan who later taught at MIT, argued that the disastrous decade of the 1930s was caused when the US replaced Britain as the largest global power but failed to take on Britain’s role in providing global public goods.
The result was the collapse of the global system into depression, genocide, and world war.
Today, as China’s power grows, will it help provide global public goods?
In domestic politics, governments produce public goods such as policing or a clean environment, from which all citizens can benefit and none are excluded.
At the global level, public goods – such as a stable climate, financial stability, or freedom of the seas – are provided by coalitions led by the largest powers.
Because their small contributions make little difference to whether they benefit or not, it is rational for them to ride for free.
But the largest powers can see the effect and feel the benefit of their contributions.
When Britain became too weak to play that role after World War I, an isolationist US continued to be a free rider, with disastrous results.
Some observers worry that as China’s power grows, it will free ride rather than contribute to an international order that it did not create.
China benefits from the United Nations system, where it has a veto in the Security Council.
It is now the second-largest funder of UN peacekeeping forces, and it participated in UN programs related to Ebola and climate change.
China has also benefited greatly from multilateral economic institutions like the World Trade Organization, the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
In 2015, China launched the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, which some saw as an alternative to the World Bank; but the new institution adheres to international rules and cooperates with the World Bank.
On the other hand, China’s rejection of a Permanent Court of Arbitration judgment last year against its territorial claims in the South China Sea raises troublesome questions.
Thus far, however, Chinese behavior has sought not to overthrow the liberal world order from which it benefits, but to increase its influence within it.
If pressed and isolated by Trump’s policy, however, will China become a disruptive free rider that pushes the world into a Kindleberger Trap?
Trump must also worry about the better-known Thucydides Trap: a China that seems too strong rather than too weak.
For example, the political scientist Graham Allison has argued that in 12 of 16 cases since 1500 when an established power has confronted a rising power, the result has been a major war.
But these numbers are not accurate, because it is not clear what constitutes a “case.”
For example, Britain was the dominant world power in the mid-nineteenth century, but it let Prussia create a powerful new German empire in the heart of the European continent.
Of course, Britain did fight Germany a half-century later, in 1914, but should that be counted as one case or two?
World War I was not simply a case of an established Britain responding to a rising Germany.
In addition to the rise of Germany, WWI was caused by the fear in Germany of Russia’s growing power, the fear of rising Slavic nationalism in a declining Austria-Hungary, as well as myriad other factors that differed from ancient Greece.
As for current analogies, today’s power gap between the US and China is much greater than that between Germany and Britain in 1914.
Metaphors can be useful as general precautions, but they become dangerous when they convey a sense of historical inexorableness.
Even the classical Greek case is not as straightforward as Thucydides made it seem.
He claimed that the cause of the second Peloponnesian War was the growth of the power of Athens and the fear it caused in Sparta.
But the Yale historian Donald Kagan has shown that Athenian power was in fact not growing.
Before the war broke out in 431 BC, the balance of power had begun to stabilize.
Athenian policy mistakes made the Spartans think that war might be worth the risk.
Athens’ growth caused the first Peloponnesian War earlier in the century, but then a Thirty-Year Truce doused the fire.
Kagan argues that to start the second, disastrous war, a spark needed to land on one of the rare bits of kindling that had not been thoroughly drenched and then continually and vigorously fanned by poor policy choices.
In other words, the war was caused not by impersonal forces, but by bad decisions in difficult circumstances.
To achieve his objectives, he must avoid the Kindleberger trap as well as the Thucydides trap.
But, above all, he must avoid the miscalculations, misperceptions, and rash judgments that plague human history.
ISTANBUL – I recently used Uber (an online service for ordering a car and driver) and did not have the usual pleasant experience.
The driver did not know the area, and, worse, he did not follow his navigator’s instructions, turning left instead of right.
When Uber asked me, as usual, to rate the driver, I did not hesitate to give him two out of five.
I wanted to save other passengers from an unpleasant experience, and I hoped that maybe feedback would encourage him to improve or find another line of work.
But, while I would always pick an average driver over a driver with a rating of two, given the choice between a two driver and a blind pick, I might pick the two, because the fear of someone even worse would keep me from taking a risk.
This is a well-known phenomenon known as loss aversion: the risk of a one outweighs the hope of a five.
Just last week, I was engaged in ranking proposals for the Knight News Challenge; to simplify things, they had a three-point ranking: three for yes, two for consider, one for reject.
The idea was to pick the easy winners, reject the losers, and focus on distinguishing among the maybes.
Ranking exercises, like the things they rank, are not all the same; different approaches fit different situations.
We live in a world where everything is being rated, whether you are a professional judge or an individual trying to make sense of modern life.
One proposal might be ranked nine out of ten, while another is eight out of 20; the first is pretty good but with limited upside, while the second is not so good, but has the potential to be great.
The two cannot really be compared: One is a safe choice, but not likely to have a huge impact; the other is riskier, but ultimately may be more worthwhile.
If you are a customer buying a product that should work, you want the nine out of ten; if you are a venture capitalist who thinks she can add value, you want the eight out of 20.
People want simplicity, yet at the same time, in a world of targeted marketing, customization, and precision, in which vendors struggle to give consumers exactly what they want, people can help themselves by thinking clearly and specifying their preferences.
The doctor says that you probably have two years to live, or a 50% expected improvement in “survival” (medical terminology for living another five years) if you undergo chemotherapy.
In other words, you can have two years of gradual decline with some pain, or three years of nauseating treatments, “chemo brain,” loss of hair, and diminished dignity.
If you think those numbers are not quite comparable, you are right; that is part of the problem.
(And the numbers may be based on a limited sample of people who do not quite resemble you.)
But, while the timing is uncertain, the trade-offs are pretty clear.
What you really want, of course, is a cure, not merely a minimal extension of life expectancy, but nothing is certain.
The choice sounds easy, but then perhaps you just want to survive to see your daughter graduate, or your son get married.
Even on the population level, we are facing some of the same complexities at HICCup (the Health Initiative Coordinating Council), a startup that I founded.
It is not, as one benighted analyst suggested, “A 20% improvement (reduction) in heart attacks plus a 30% improvement (reduction) in diabetes incidence equals a 50% improvement.”
You need to average the improvements to get a figure somewhere between 20% and 30%.
But how do you weight diabetes versus heart attacks, life extension versus quality of life?
There is also, in any sector, the issue of what the data really mean.
One of my favorite (sad) stories concerns consumer credit ratings in Russia.
A retail banker once told me that in making credit decisions in Russia, his analysts had faced a shortage of data and had assumed that a criminal record would be one easy way to weed out the bad eggs.
But when the bank ran the numbers, they discovered that although about half of the people applying for low-end, high-interest-rate credit had a police record, this did not seem to reflect on payment outcomes.
I suspect the reason was that the people with no police record were the middle 50%.
At the bottom were 25% who had a police record for some kind of bad behavior.
At the top were 25% who had a police record for exceptionally good behavior, like refusing to pay bribes or to overlook corruption.
Do we end up focusing on price because we can measure it, to the exclusion of other things that matter?
This phenomenon has rendered the airline business largely unprofitable – and customers increasingly unhappy.
Quality used to be included in the price of a ticket; now, with surcharges for seat selection, meals, and the like, customers are charged for it separately.
In short, the paradox of choice (as elegantly described in an eponymous book by Barry Schwartz) is that too many choices confuse us and raise the possibility of regret; how can we be sure that we are getting just what we want, and that something else would not be better?
Or it may be that the greatest happiness of all comes from not having to worry about stuff like this.
CAMBRIDGE – In 1953, Milton Friedman published an essay called “The Case for Flexible Exchange Rates,” arguing that they cushion an economy from internal and external shocks by bringing about just the right price changes required to keep the economy at full employment.
But after almost half-a-century of floating exchange rates, the reality is more complicated than that.
To understand Friedman’s logic, consider a scenario in which productivity in the United States rises.
In an efficient system, this should reduce the price of US goods relative to those of the rest of the world, with US exports becoming cheaper than imports.
As America’s terms of trade (the ratio of export prices to import prices) deteriorate, demand is shifted toward US goods, keeping the economy at full employment.
If prices are “sticky” (in the producer’s currency), however, a potential hitch emerges.
Say the prices of US imports from Japan are sticky in Japanese yen and the prices of US exports to Japan are sticky in dollars.
The terms of trade will thus remain unchanged, as long as the exchange rate does as well.
By enabling monetary expansion, and thus causing the US dollar to depreciate, the logic goes, a floating exchange rate allows the prices of US exports to decline relative to its imports.
The result is the desired deterioration of the producer’s terms of trade and the maintenance of full employment.
But this line of reasoning assumes that a country’s terms of trade move in lockstep with its exchange rate.
And that, as history over a quarter-century has shown, does not seem to be the case.
In a recent paper, the International Monetary Fund’s Emine Boz, Princeton’s Mikkel Plagborg-Møller, and I construct bilateral export- and import-price indices for 2,500 country pairs, covering 91% of world trade for the period 1989-2015.
We exclude the prices of commodities (oil, copper, and other such goods that are traded on an exchange), as these prices are not sticky.
As it turns out, there is no evidence that the terms of trade and the exchange rate move in tandem.
On the contrary, a 1% depreciation in the bilateral exchange rate is associated with only a 0.1% depreciation in the bilateral terms of trade in the year of the depreciation.
The origin of this disconnect – which Camila Casas, Federico Diez, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and I describe in a 2016 paper – seems to be that, for the vast majority of internationally traded goods, prices are sticky in dollars, not in the producer’s currency, as Friedman’s reasoning required.
Almost 100% of US exports to Japan are priced in dollars, meaning that they, as in Friedman’s version, are sticky in dollars.
But 80% of US imports from Japan are invoiced in dollars, meaning that those prices, too, are sticky in dollars, rather than in Japanese yen.
As a result, the terms of trade change very little, even if the exchange rate fluctuates.
This means that, even if the US dollar depreciates, it does not become more expensive for US importers to buy Japanese goods, so there is limited incentive to switch from Japanese to US goods.
Likewise, a weaker yen does little to spur Japanese exports to the US, because the dollar price of those exports remains roughly constant.
As I documented in a 2015 paper, the share of world imports invoiced in US dollars is 4.7 times larger than the share of world imports involving the US.
This “dominant currency paradigm” lies at the root of the terms-of-trade disconnect.
In fact, we document that global trade prices and volumes are driven by the dollar exchange rate, rather than the exchange rate between the two trading partners’ currencies.
So fluctuations in the price and quantity of India’s imports from China, for example, depend on the rupee-dollar exchange rate, rather than the rupee-renminbi exchange rate.
The strength of the US dollar is thus a key predictor of aggregate trade volume and consumer/producer price inflation worldwide.
Friedman was right about one thing: flexible exchange rates do provide valuable monetary-policy independence.
But, in a dollar-dominated trade environment, their ability to support full employment is severely limited.
As the United States prepares to take the war on terrorism to Saddam Hussein's doorstep, the Bush administration has repeatedly called attention to human rights violations in Iraq.
The Iraqi regime, President Bush tells us, has engaged in torture and extra-judicial killing and keeps the Iraqi people from enjoying basic civic and political freedoms.
Not once, however, has the President suggested that these problems might be addressed through the UN human rights treaty system - a system through which Iraq has committed to abide by the very principles it is accused of violating.
Perhaps this is because the Bush administration, which has just opted out of the treaty creating the International Criminal Court and is busy trying to minimize the effects of the treaty on the US, would rather not focus attention on UN treaties just now.
Or perhaps it is because Iraq is far from alone in its disregard of its human rights treaty commitments.
Whatever the reason, the apparent irrelevance of the human rights treaty system in current debates is a worrisome sign.
In the half century since the creation of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the world community has created nearly 100 universal and regional human rights agreements governing issues as diverse as discrimination against women, state-sponsored torture, and the right of collective bargaining.
Although these developments provide clear symbols of the world's ongoing commitment to protecting human rights, strikingly little is known about the true effectiveness of such treaties in achieving their goals.
My own recent research suggests that although countries that ratify treaties usually have better human rights records than countries that do not, countries with the worst human rights records actually ratify many treaties as often as nations with the best practices.
Indeed, half of the countries responsible for the most recent widespread cases of genocide, including Rwanda in 1994 and Yugoslavia in the early 1990s, had ratified the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
This was essentially the same rate of ratification found among countries that had committed no genocide.
Iraq, which just held an election in which Saddam Hussein was re-elected in an uncontested election with 100% of the vote, long ago ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
And Afghanistan, which under the Taliban prohibited women's participation in political or civic life, was and is a member of the Convention on the Political Rights of Women.
Of course, that some rogue states ratify human rights treaties should not call the treaty system as a whole into doubt.
Human rights treaties serve to foster gradual improvements in human rights practices in both non-ratifying and ratifying countries through changes in shared understandings of what behavior is acceptable.
That it is no longer is partly due to the creation of several treaties that prohibit its use.
Human rights treaties may also have positive effects on ratifying countries over the long term, creating public commitments to which human rights activists can point as they push nations to make gradual, if grudging, improvements down the road.
Nonetheless, there is as of yet no clear evidence that the UN's human rights treaties have a direct measurable positive impact on the human rights practices of individual countries that ratify them, all else being equal.
For the most part, human rights treaties are poorly monitored and enforced, and those countries that join face little or no penalty for failing to match their rhetoric with action.
In this context, it is perhaps to be expected that some countries might be tempted to use ratification to try to placate those pressing for improvements in human rights, thereby turning ratification into a substitute for, rather than a spur to, real improvements in human rights.
What, then, should be done to make the human rights treaty system more effective and more relevant?
A first step would be to augment today's reliance on self-policing with a stronger system of independent expert monitoring.
The more information we have about countries' human rights practices, the harder it will be for them to get away with abuses.
Above all, guardians of human rights must remain vigilant, viewing ratification of treaties not as the end of the struggle for human dignity, but as the beginning in an evolving campaign.
In explaining why he was abandoning the Kyoto accord on global warming, President Bush said: “We will not do anything that harms our economy, because first things first are the people who live in America.”
In the second presidential debate, George W. Bush was asked what how he would use America's global power and influence.
These remarks would not have surprised anyone who studied the speeches of the President's father.
The first President Bush said much the same thing almost a decade ago, at the 1992 “Earth Summit” in Rio de Janeiro.
When representatives of developing nations asked Bush senior to put the over-consumption of resources by the developed countries, especially the US, on the agenda he said that “the American life-style is not up for negotiation” - no matter what, or so it seemed to his audience, the costs to others might be.
But it is not only the Bush administrations that put the interests of Americans first.
In the Balkans, the Clinton-Gore administration made it clear that it was not prepared to risk the life of a single American in order to reduce the risk of civilian casualties.
Observing this, Timothy Garton Ash wrote: “It is a perverted moral code that will allow a million innocent civilians of another race to be made destitute because you are not prepared to risk the life of a single professional soldier of your own.”
In Kosovo restricting intervention to aerial bombardment made this strategy a total success: NATO forces suffered not a single casualty in combat, but approximately 300 Kosovar, 209 Serb and 3 Chinese civilians were killed.
This approach to the duties of a national leader, stated bluntly and honestly, forces us to consider a fundamental ethical issue.
To what extent should political leaders see their role narrowly, in terms of promoting the interests of their citizens, and to what extent should they be concerned with the welfare of people everywhere?
Mr Romano Prodi, President of the EU Commission, and a former Prime Minister of Italy, responded to President's Bush's most recent statement by saying that “If one wants to be a world leader, one must know how to look after the entire earth and not only American industry.”
But the question is not only one for those who aspire to be world leaders.
The leaders of smaller nations must also consider, in contexts like global warming, trade pacts, foreign aid and the treatment of refugees, to what extent they are prepared to consider the interests of "outsiders”.
As Ash suggests, there is a strong ethical case for saying that it is wrong for leaders to give absolute priority to the interests of their own citizens.
The value of the life of an innocent human being does not vary according to nationality.
Even the Bush Administration put the lives of millions of HIV-infected Africans ahead of the economic interests of American pharmaceutical corporations when it reaffirmed former President Clinton=s executive order saying that the US would not prevent African nations licensing their own manufacturers to produce cheap copies of drugs that could save the lives of their citizens, even though American companies held the patents on those drugs.
If American interests always come first, that decision - which was the right decision - would be difficult to explain.
But, it might be said, the abstract ethical idea that all humans are entitled to equal consideration cannot govern the way we look at the duties of a political leader.
Just as parents are expected to provide for the interests of their own children, rather than for the interests of strangers, in accepting the office of president of the United States, George W. Bush assumed a specific role that makes it his duty to protect and further the interests of Americans.
Other countries have their leaders, who have similar roles in respect to the interests of their fellow-citizens.
So long as that situation prevails, we must have nation-states and the leaders of those nation-states must give preference to the interests of their citizens.
Without it, unless electors suddenly to turn into altruists of a kind never before seen on a large scale, democracy could not function.
American voters would not elect a president who gave no more weight to their interests than to the interests of people living in other countries.
Perhaps, given the global nature of the problems we now face, this is an argument for a federalist world, rather than one divided into sovereign nation-states.
But as long as that remains a lofty idea without political substance, our leaders will feel that they must give some degree of priority to the interests of their own citizens.
Parents may give preference to their children, but if buying new toys for your children comes at the cost of the lives of other children, that cannot be defended.
Abandoning the Kyoto accord, many believe, will threaten the lives of tens or hundreds of millions of people living in countries too poor to protect them from the consequences of climate change and rising sea levels.
That is why Europeans, and people in many other countries are incensed at the casual way in which America’s President assumed that “first things first are the people who live in America.”
It may be defensible for President Bush to give some preference to the economic interests of Americans, but to put them above the life-and-death interests of millions of human beings goes beyond what any ethical approach can justify.
NEW DELHI – The second anniversary of the “Arab Spring” in Egypt was marked by riots in Tahrir Square that made many observers fear that their optimistic projections in 2011 had been dashed.
Part of the problem is that expectations had been distorted by a metaphor that described events in short-run terms.
If, instead of “Arab Spring,” we had spoken of “Arab revolutions,” we might have had more realistic expectations.
Who would have predicted that within a decade, an obscure Corsican soldier would lead French armies to the banks of the Nile, or that the Napoleonic Wars would disrupt Europe until 1815?
If we think of the Arab revolutions, there are many surprises yet to come.
So far, most Arab monarchies have had enough legitimacy, money, and force to survive the waves of popular revolt that have brought down secular republican autocrats like Egypt’s Hosni Mubarak and Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi, but we are only two years into the revolutionary process.
Beneath the Arab political revolutions lies a deeper and longer process of radical change that is sometimes called the information revolution.
We cannot yet fully grasp its implications, but it is fundamentally transforming the nature of power in the twenty-first century, in which all states exist in an environment that even the most powerful authorities cannot control as they did in the past.
Governments have always worried about the flow and control of information, and our age is hardly the first to be strongly affected by dramatic changes in information technology.
Gutenberg’s printing press was important to the origins of the Protestant Reformation and the ensuing wars in Europe.
Today, however, a much larger part of the population, both within and among countries, has access to the power that comes from information.
The current global revolution is based on rapid technological advances that have dramatically decreased the cost of creating, finding, and transmitting information.
Computing power doubled roughly every 18 months for 30 years, and, by the beginning of the twenty-first century, it cost one-thousandth of what it did in the early 1970’s.
If the price of automobiles had fallen as quickly as the price of semiconductors, a car today would cost $5.
As recently as the 1980’s, phone calls over copper wire could carry only one page of information per second; today, a thin strand of optical fiber can transmit 90,000 volumes in a second.
In 1980, a gigabyte of data storage occupied a room; now, 200 gigabytes of storage fits in your shirt pocket.
Even more crucial has been the enormous drop in the cost of transmitting information, which reduces barriers to entry.
As computing power has become cheaper and computers have shrunk to the size of smart phones and other portable devices, the decentralizing effects have been dramatic.
Power over information is much more widely distributed today than even a few decades ago.
Individuals and private organizations – including WikiLeaks, multinational corporations, NGOs, terrorists, or spontaneous social movements – have been empowered to play a direct role.
The spread of information means that informal networks are undercutting the monopoly of traditional bureaucracy, with all governments less able to control their agendas.
Political leaders enjoy fewer degrees of freedom before they must respond to events, and must then communicate not only with other governments, but with civil society as well.
But it would be a mistake to “over-learn” the lessons that the Arab revolutions have taught about information, technology, and power.
While the information revolution could, in principle, reduce large states’ power and increase that of small states and non-state actors, politics and power are more complex than such technological determinism implies.
In the middle of the twentieth century, people feared that computers and new means of communications would create the kind of central governmental control dramatized in George Orwell’s 1984.
And, indeed, authoritarian governments in China, Saudi Arabia, and elsewhere have used the new technologies to try to control information.
Ironically for cyber-utopians, the electronic trails created by social networks like Twitter and Facebook sometimes make the job of the secret police easier.
After its initial embarrassment by Twitter in 2009, the Iranian government was able to suppress the country’s “green” movement in 2010.
Similarly, while the “great firewall of China” is far from perfect, the government has managed thus far to cope, even as the Internet has burgeoned in the country.
In other words, some aspects of the information revolution help the small, but some help the already large and powerful.
While a hacker and a government can both create information and exploit the Internet, it matters for many purposes that large governments can deploy tens of thousands of trained people and have access to vast computing power to crack codes or intrude into other organizations.
Likewise, while it is now cheap to disseminate existing information, the collection and production of new information often requires major investment, and, in many competitive situations, new information matters most.
Intelligence collection is a good example, and the elaborate Stuxnet worm that disabled Iranian nuclear centrifuges seems to have been a government creation.
Governments and large states still have more resources than information-empowered private actors, but the stage on which they play is more crowded.
As events in Egypt and elsewhere have shown, we are only just beginning to comprehend the effects of the information revolution on power in this century.
NEW YORK – Ratko Mladić is an easy man to hate.
In his prime, he not only talked and behaved like a thug, but he also looked like one – the kind of bull-necked, pale-eyed, snarling psychopath who would gladly pull out your fingernails just for fun.
Apart from many other cruelties, the Butcher of Bosnia was responsible, in the summer of 1995, for the killing of around 8,000 unarmed Bosnian Muslim men and boys in the woods around Srebrenica.
So it will give most of us a feeling of warm satisfaction that he has finally been arrested in the Serbian village of Lazarevo.
Serbia has gained respect by arresting Mladić, which should speed up its membership in the European Union.
The former victims of Mladić’s Bosnian Serb forces will feel that some justice is being done at last.
Yet the forthcoming trial of Ratko Mladić raises certain uncomfortable questions.
Why, in the first place, can’t he be put on trial in Belgrade, instead of The Hague?
And is it really wise to charge him with genocide, as well as crimes against humanity and war crimes?
Both questions reveal how much we still live in the shadow of the Nuremberg Tribunal, where the Nazi leaders were tried by an international judicial panel.
It was believed, perhaps correctly, that the Germans would be incapable of trying their own former leaders.
And the Nazi crimes had been so horrendous in scale and intent that new laws – “crimes against humanity” – had to be created to try those who had been formally responsible for them.
States, too, should be held accountable for their deeds – hence, in 1948, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide.
The Holocaust was not the main issue at stake in the Nuremberg Trials.
Nevertheless, the allies thought that the Nazi project of exterminating an entire people called for an entirely new legal approach, to ensure that such an atrocity would never happen again.
The problem with genocide, as a legal concept, is that it is vague.
It refers to “acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial, or religious group.”
The emphasis is on “intent,” not on the numbers of people whose lives are destroyed.
Mao Zedong murdered up to 40 million Chinese, but did he intend to destroy them as a group?
We know that Hitler did intend to destroy every last Jewish man, woman, and child.
Even though mass killings are not rare in history, Hitler’s extermination plan was, if not unique, certainly highly unusual.
However, the laudable effort to prevent such a thing from recurring has had unfortunate consequences.
For, in our zeal to learn lessons from history, we often learn the wrong ones, or distort history towards dubious ends.
In a way, the killings at Srebrenica also were affected by the memories of World War II.
The United Nations’ Dutch battalion promised to protect the Muslims there, even though it was in no position to do so.
It was a promise that partly reflected the feeling of guilt that still haunts the Dutch for looking the other way as the Germans rounded up and deported two-thirds of their country’s Jewish population to death camps.
Alas, outnumbered and outgunned by Mladić’s forces, the Dutch surrendered Srebrenica to its fate.
Because of the trauma of Hitler’s intention to murder all of the Jews, genocide has become the one compelling reason for military action, including armed invasion of other countries.
Bernard Kouchner, the founder of Doctors Without Borders, wanted the world to intervene in Nigeria in 1970, because he saw the killing of Ibos by Nigerian troops as a genocidal echo of Auschwitz.
Others saw a brutal civil war, and cautioned that intervention would make things worse.
For some, we are forever living in 1938, or rather, 1942, when the Nazis approved what Hitler called “the final solution of the Jewish question.”
President George W. Bush and his cheerleaders, invoking the Munich Agreement at every opportunity, regarded the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, as a call to arms.
We should stop Sudan’s Omar al-Bashir’s genocide in Darfur.
We must stop Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi from committing mass murder in Benghazi.
This is especially true of intervention in civil wars, where the sides cannot easily be divided into victims and aggressors, good and evil.
Of course, the world becomes much simpler if we choose to see it in black and white.
And the Mladić trial will, no doubt, encourage this perception.
He will be tried for genocide, because the UN’s tribunal for ex-Yugoslavia and the International Court of Justice decided that the Bosnian Serbs were genocidal.
Since his subordinate, Radislav Krstić, was already sentenced for his complicity in the genocide at Srebrenica, Mladić will presumably be convicted.
And a trial, however unsatisfactory, is in most cases still to be preferred to an assassination.
But trying him for genocide, even though it will be hard to prove that he ever intended to exterminate Bosnian Muslims as a group, just because they were Muslims, will further muddy the term’s already vague definition.
Mladić was engaged in ethnic cleansing, which, though reprehensible, is not the same as genocide.
By invoking Hitler’s ghost too often, we trivialize the enormity of what he actually did.
FEZ – Since 2012, more than 12 million migrants and refugees have landed in Europe, the Middle East, and North Africa.
The result has been an escalating political and humanitarian crisis – and increasingly heated debate about how to address it.
In Europe, the debate is characterized by dissent and division, exemplified by the United Kingdom’s recent vote to leave the European Union – an outcome that was shaped largely by overblown fears about immigration.
With EU member states failing to agree on how to secure external borders, much less what to do with the refugees who have already arrived, an effective, unified response has proved elusive.
In the Middle East, the refugee debate is not nearly as loud, but it is no less passionate.
Jordan, a country of 6.5 million, now hosts more than 1.4 million, mostly Syrian, refugees.
Lebanon’s 1.5 million Syrian refugees represent nearly one-third of the country’s population of 4.7 million.
Turkey, with some 75 million citizens, now hosts 2.7 million Syrian refugees, about 30% of whom live in 22 government-run camps near the Syrian border.
With most of the refugees originating in the Middle East – especially Syria, but also Afghanistan, Iraq, Yemen, and Libya – the fact that the region is shouldering the overwhelming share of the burden is not surprising.
The Gulf countries, despite their vast oil wealth, have taken in hardly any refugees; they contend that, because they are not parties to the 1951 United Nations Refugee Convention, they have no obligation to do so.
The United Arab Emirates, for example, has taken in just over 200,000 Syrian nationals since the Syrian crisis began in 2011.
Egypt, Tunisia, Morocco, and Algeria permit Syrian refugees to enter, but provide no support to those who do; there are no refugees camps in these countries.
Already, Jordan’s social-welfare budget is reaching a breaking point, spurring social tensions.
Schools in both Jordan and Lebanon were overcrowded even before the refugees arrived; now they are bursting at the seams.
Even the refugees who work in Jordan and Lebanon are creating problems, as they inadvertently suppress wages for lower-skill jobs.
Turkey’s government has delivered more than $8 billion in aid; by contrast, the EU has delivered only a small share of the €3.2 billion ($3.6 billion) it pledged last November.
With host countries overstretched, it is unsurprising that refugees live in rough conditions, whether in camps or very poor neighborhoods, with no amenities or sanitation.
Hundreds of thousands of refugees are unemployed, including the most highly skilled among them, whose qualifications are often not recognized.
As a result, forced labor, slavery, prostitution, and social exclusion are on the rise.
Keeping the migrants largely in the Middle East is critical – not least to prevent them from drowning in the Mediterranean in their attempt to reach Europe.
The Turkey-EU agreement concluded last March – according to which non-refugee migrants who reach the EU are sent to Turkey – has helped, contributing to a sharp decline in the number of migrants arriving in Greece.
But much more needs to be done – and Middle Eastern countries should take the lead.
Most urgently, the wealthy Gulf states should provide more funding to the countries that are hosting the most refugees, thereby enabling them to begin improving living conditions for those seeking safety.
Then, in order to develop a more comprehensive solution that keeps countries stable and ensures that refugees receive adequate protection, deeper collaboration among governments, as well as with the private sector and civil-society organizations across the region, is needed.
The problem is that there is no consensus in the Middle East, either among governments or civil society, about how to respond to the crisis.
To break the impasse, one or two bold and far-sighted leaders need to remind their citizens of their countries’ legal and, perhaps more important, moral duties to the refugees.
The Islamic tradition of protecting the welfare of the poor can provide the language and legitimacy needed to inspire citizens to do their part.
In my book New Horizons of Muslim Diaspora in North America and Europe, I argue against the conventional wisdom that migrants and refugees are a threat to the Middle East’s security and development.
Just like in the developed countries of the West, migrants in the Middle East can offer untold contributions to their host societies.
Decent living conditions – including housing, nutrition, and health care – must be guaranteed, in addition to educational and employment opportunities.
If a few countries continue to shoulder the entire burden, however, it will be virtually impossible to meet the refugees’ needs.
Given this, the region needs to develop a mechanism for distributing refugees more fairly across countries, something like the EU’s quota system.
Even if all of this is achieved, a truly sustainable solution to the refugee crisis will not come until Syria is at peace, and order is restored in failing states across the Middle East.
That is why it is so important for the region’s governments to play a bigger and more assertive role in tackling the violence and instability that lies at the root of the crisis.
Our governments must invest heavily in our neighbors’ stability, including by bringing the Syrian peace process to a successful conclusion, and in the wellbeing of all of our citizens.
BEIJING – Consider this: Despite China’s swelling foreign-exchange reserves – the result of persistent current-account surpluses – market and interbank short-term interest rates are soaring.
As the world’s largest currency issuer, China’s broad money supply (M2) is 1.5 times larger than that of the United States, with an M2/GDP ratio of about 200%, compared to about 80% in the US.
In the years prior to the global financial crisis, China’s total debt hovered around 150% of GDP.
But, since 2008, credit expansion has proceeded at a staggering pace, driving the debt/GDP ratio above 200%, with private credit alone (including to state-owned enterprises) amounting to 130% of GDP.
Moreover, China continues to attract huge amounts of cross-border capital, as advanced countries like the US pursue expansionary monetary policies.
According to a recent renminbi credit report, the People’s Bank of China’s foreign-exchange reserves climbed to ¥27.5 trillion ($4.5 trillion) in September, up ¥126.3 billion from August – the largest monthly gain since April.
At the same time, the PBOC’s new renminbi funds outstanding for foreign exchange – the amount of renminbi the central bank spends to purchase foreign-currency assets – totaled ¥268.2 billion, reflecting a monthly increase of almost ¥170 billion.
Instead of easing liquidity constraints, as expected, these gains have exacerbated them, reflected in a spike in the interbank interest rate in October, when the seven-day rate soared to 5% and the yield on ten-year government bonds reached a five-year high.
Increasingly strained liquidity seems to be the consequence of all of the government’s recent actions.
Earlier this year, the PBOC attempted to clean up its toxic assets and promote bank deleveraging.
While these efforts contributed to a contraction in asset and debt growth, they also led to a severe liquidity squeeze that rocked financial markets and sent money-market rates soaring in June.
The PBOC has since resumed its reverse repo operations – purchasing securities from commercial banks with an agreement to resell them in the future – thereby injecting liquidity into the banking system.
But, given a rising bidding rate, peaking capital costs, and restrictions on the downstream transfer of assets, these efforts seem unlikely to ease the strain.
Rather, capital-structure and maturity mismatches – a result of the rapid and uneven buildup of debt in the last five years – have distorted the allocation of resources, leading to non-performing, idle, and inefficient assets, thereby amplifying the financial system’s hidden flaws and increasing risk.
Furthermore, the financial system has become excessively dependent on credit, especially when it comes to risk assets.
With financing channels extremely limited, banks have been forced to participate heavily, assuming substantial risk, which is aggravated by underdeveloped bond and stock markets.
In such a concentrated risk environment, any shock could amount to a systemic blow to the financial sector.
Making matters worse, the financial sector is increasingly diverging from the real economy.
With a substantial share of financial resources being allocated to infrastructure and real-estate development, which have lower output efficiency, capital has tended to circle back into the financial system, instead of flowing toward activities in the real economy.
Since 2008, liquidity-thirsty local governments have used a variety of measures, including off-balance-sheet loans and interbank debt financing, to channel capital into local-government financing vehicles and state-owned companies.
This has driven up the debt ratios of governments, businesses, and banks, causing their balance sheets to deteriorate rapidly.
Now, the pressure to deleverage is on – a process that will inevitably lead to liquidity tightening.
Indeed, according to the American economist Irving Fisher’s long established “debt-deflation” theory, when an over-indebted economy suffers a shock, the joint effects of debt and deflation can trigger a downturn.
Such an outcome would cause public- and private-sector balance sheets to deteriorate further, raising fears of default and increasing the cost of financing.
Subsequent efforts to deleverage would cause balance sheets to contract and reduce the money multiplier, thereby diminishing confidence and hurting borrowing.
While cash hoarding pushes down nominal interest rates by reducing currency in circulation, the rapid decline in inflation will drive up the actual interest rate, thereby aggravating the debt burden.
In short, China’s liquidity troubles are rooted in the recent buildup of leverage, which has triggered debt deflation.
With this in mind, macroeconomic policy should not only reduce borrowing and financing costs through cuts in interest rates and reserve requirements, but also work to strengthen balance sheets.
That means abandoning the investment-driven growth model, promoting deep monetary and financial reform, boosting investment efficiency and resource allocation, and improving the government’s functioning.
This is a tall order – one that can be met only by a long-term commitment from policymakers.
The incomes needed to repay loans have evaporated, and assets posted as collateral have lost value.
Consider Strike Debt, an offshoot of the Occupy movement, which calls itself “a nationwide movement of debt resisters fighting for economic justice and democratic freedom.”
Its Web site argues that “[w]ith stagnant wages, systemic unemployment, and public service cuts” people are being forced into debt in order to obtain the most basic necessities of life, leading them to “surrender [their] futures to the banks.”
One of Strike Debt’s initiatives, “Rolling Jubilee,” crowd-sources funds to buy up and extinguish debt, a process that it calls “collective refusal.”
The group’s progress has been impressive, raising more than $700,000 so far and extinguishing debt worth almost $18.6 million.
It is the existence of a secondary debt market that enables Rolling Jubilee to buy debt so cheaply.
Financial institutions that have come to doubt their borrowers’ ability to repay sell the debt to third parties at knock-down prices, often for as little as five cents on the dollar.
Buyers then attempt to profit by recouping some or all of the debt from the borrowers.
The US student-loan provider Sallie Mae admitted that it sells repackaged debt for as little as 15 cents on the dollar.
To draw attention to the often-nefarious practices of debt collectors, Rolling Jubilee recently canceled student debt for 2,761 students of Everest College, a for-profit school whose parent company, Corinthian Colleges, is being sued by the US government for predatory lending.
Everest College’s loan portfolio was valued at almost $3.9 million.
Rolling Jubilee bought it for $106,709.48, or about three cents on the dollar.
In the US alone, students owe more than $1 trillion, or around 6% of GDP.
And the student population is just one of many social groups that lives on debt.
Indeed, throughout the world, the economic downturn of 2008-2009 increased the burden of private and public debt alike – to the point that the public-private distinction became blurred.
In a recent speech in Chicago, Irish President Michael D. Higgins explained how private debt became sovereign debt: “As a consequence of the need to borrow so as to finance current expenditure and, above all, as a result of the blanket guarantee extended to the main Irish banks’ assets and liabilities, Ireland’s general government debt increased from 25% of GDP in 2007 to 124% in 2013.”
The Irish government’s aim, of course, was to save the banking system.
But the unintended consequence of the bailout was to shatter confidence in the government’s solvency.
In the eurozone, Ireland, Greece, Portugal, and Cyprus all had to restructure their sovereign debt to avoid outright default.
Rising debt/GDP ratios cast a pall over fiscal policy, and became the main justification for austerity policies that prolonged the slump.
Creditor-debtor conflict has been the stuff of politics since Babylonian times.
Orthodoxy has always upheld the sacred rights of the creditor; political necessity has frequently demanded relief for the debtor.
Which side wins in any situation depends on the extent of debtor distress and the strength of the opposing creditor-debtor coalitions.
Creditors, asserting their right to be repaid in full, historically have created as many legal and political obstacles to default as possible, insisting on harsh sanctions – garnishment of income, for example, and, at the extreme, imprisonment or even slavery – for borrowers’ failure to honor their debt obligations.
Governments that incurred debt in costly wars have been expected to set aside annual “sinking funds” for repayment.
Morality, however, has not been entirely on the side of the creditor.
But, though it might be sinful to go into debt, Matthew 6:12 supports absolution: “forgive us our debts, as we also have forgiven our debtors.”
Widespread social resistance to creditors’ claims on debtors’ property for non-payment has meant that “foreclosure” has rarely been carried to extremes.
The position of debtors was further strengthened by the prohibition of usury – charging unreasonably high interest on money.
Interest-rate caps were abolished in Britain only in 1835; the near-zero central-bank rates prevailing since 2009 are a current example of efforts to protect borrowers.
The truth of the matter, as David Graeber points out in his majestic Debt: The First 5,000 Years, is that that the creditor-debtor relationship embodies no iron law of morality; rather, it is a social relationship that always must be negotiated.
When quantitative precision and an unyielding approach to debt obligations are the rule, conflict and penury soon follow.
In an effort to stem recurrent debt crises, traditional societies embraced the “Law of Jubilee,” a ceremonial wiping clean of the slate.
“The Law of Jubilee,” writes Graeber, “stipulated that all debts be automatically canceled ‘in the Sabbath year’ (that is, after seven years had passed), and that all who languished in bondage owing to such debts would be released.”
The Rolling Jubilee is a timely reminder of the continuing relevance of one of the oldest laws of social life.
The moral of the tale is not, as Polonius instructed his son Laertes, “neither a borrower nor a lender be.”
Rather, we need to limit the supply of and demand for credit to what the economy is capable of producing.
How to do this and maintain freedom of enterprise is one of the great unsettled questions of political economy.
BUDAPEST – At a recent conference of newspaper editors in which I took part, a small crowd gathered to talk about journalism and new media.
When I told the group that I had begun my career as a magazine fact-checker, several of them grew misty-eyed, as if someone had told a group of priests about his childhood as an altar boy.
I brought up my past because I think that fact-checking is the single best training not just for journalism, but for life in general.
Is there something in it for him – a higher stock price, an advertising fee, or someone else’s gratitude?
Or is he simply biased because of the people he knows, the company he works for, or the attitudes he picked up at home?
I spent hours picking through sources – mostly dusty papers in the years before the Internet, or strangers on the telephone – to clarify questions of fact: Was this really the first such product?
Was his claim that revenues had grown for the last five years true merely because of acquisitions that his company had made?
My life was ruled by tk – which stands for “to kum,” or “to come,” in the jargon of reporters.
We fact-checkers would joke about the lazy reporters who would hand us copy such as, “Juan Tigar, tk years old, grew up in tk before studying at tk.
Now tk title at Widgets Corp., he…” Our job was to fill in the tk’s.
We learned not just thousands of facts that I have since forgotten, but an attitude of skepticism coupled with reverence for the truth.
That attitude contrasts with the skepticism I once heard from a Russian reporter about her early days on the job.
“Whenever we read an article about the health dangers of butter, we would immediately run out and buy as much butter as we could find,” she told me.
In other words, Russians looked only for the agenda, the motivation behind the assertion.
Of course, spin, propaganda, and censorship persist in journalism, but with one big difference: Almost anyone can now operate as a reporter.
In the United States, the Federal Trade Commission has announced plans to require bloggers and celebrity endorsers to disclose gifts or payments from vendors and others seeking the bloggers’ positive comments online.
As the journalistic priesthood erodes and everyone can become a citizen reporter or commentator, regulating or training all would-be journalists is not the answer.
In line with the bottom-up, do-it-yourself ethos of the Internet, where people book their own flights, publish their own photos, and sell their own second-hand goods, it should be the users’ responsibility to do their own fact-checking.
This is not to say that journalists should not check their own facts (or that priests should not observe the tenets of their own religion).
But in the end, everyone has to become a better reader – more skeptical and more curious.
Does this blogger ever say anything negative, or is she always talking about the great products she uses?
Governments can impose regulations, but in the end we will get the kind of journalism for which we ask.
If we ask for it, Web sites will offer not just content but reputation systems, so that contributors will have reputations as reliable sources (or not).
We should not outlaw anonymity (which has its uses), but we can ask for details about the people whose words we are reading.
Someone may legitimately want to remain anonymous, but we can draw our own conclusions about their reasons.
That much thinking may sound like a lot of work, but it is what is required of a responsible adult these days.
Compared to a century ago, more people spend less time laboring to ensure their physical existence.
But, in this increasingly confusing world, we need to spend a little more time laboring to ensure our own intellectual integrity – a task that we cannot outsource to governments or even to media.
Facts are holy, but not all media that claim to report them, “new” or old, can be trusted.
Providence, R.I. – China is now celebrating the 30th anniversary of the period officially known as “reform and opening.”
During moments of political transition – a military victory, for example – the emperor might designate a special “era name” to help celebrate the good news.
Or the court might test out a new era name after a political debacle, in an effort to wipe the slate clean.
The last emperor of the Tang Dynasty proclaimed seven era names in fourteen years, as he sought in vain to “re-brand” his reign and avoid his regime’s demise.
Deng Xiaoping began to champion “reform and opening” in 1978.
“Reform” suggested a loosening of central controls on economic life, undertaken in a spirit of pragmatism and gradualism, as an antidote to Mao Zedong’s ideology of “revolution.”
Similarly, “opening” heralded the PRC’s integration into the world community – especially the capitalist West.
One must go back to the Qing Dynasty (1644-1912) and its 60-year era of “heavenly flourishing” ( Qianlong ) in the eighteenth century to find a comparable period of coherent political and economic policy.
The era of “reform and opening” has outlived its “emperor” by more than a decade, and has been the common thread running through transfers of political authority from Deng to Jiang Zemin and Hu Jintao.
Even the largest popular challenge the Chinese Communist Party ever faced, the demonstrations of 1989, now looks like a blip that helped Deng consolidate support for his model of development.
If one factor undergirds China’s commitment to “reform and opening,” it is the extraordinary macroeconomic changes of the past 30 years.
In China, people call it fazhan , or “development,” but in much of rest of the world, it is more commonly described simply as the “China Boom,” or the “China Miracle.”
The boom began in the countryside in the late 1970’s and 1980’s, and was followed by today’s urban, industrial-led growth.
Indeed, there have been many smaller “booms” – in consumption, foreign direct investment, domestic stock markets, trade, travel, overseas study, military modernization, and international diplomacy.
There is also a boom in pollution and toxic waste, and booming interest in religion – from Buddhism to Pentecostal Christianity – and in Confucian philosophy.
A leading fashion industry executive argues that a key engine driving the economic boom has been the influx of women into the workforce, particularly in the manufacturing zones of the south.
Another compelling explanation comes from a venture capitalist who credits Chinese society with copious reserves of entrepreneurial energy that derives, he believes, from the fact that Chinese culture attaches very little shame to failing in a business enterprise.
Whatever the cause, the boom seems an unlikely capstone to a century of war, ferment, and revolution, and only adds to the sense of discontinuity that characterizes modern China.
Certainly, few observers looking in 1978 at the smoldering embers of the Cultural Revolution, or at the seeming ruination of the post-1989 years, thought China would emerge as the lightning rod of the world’s developmental hopes.
Paradoxically, the apparently discontinuous and contradictory nature of the “era of reform and opening” may actually help explain how China’s boom came about.
The tumult of the Maoist period instilled in a broad cross-section of people a profound appreciation for stability, and a yearning to be left alone.
Deng capitalized on this revolution-weariness by diminishing the role of politics and the state in people’s private lives and freeing them to release their pent-up energy to pursue their own goals.
Revolutionary communism may well have cleared the path for the boom in other ways as well, suggesting that the shift from socialist utopianism to capitalist pragmatism was less a U-turn than a sequential process of “creative destruction.”
After all, Mao’s Cultural Revolution against “feudal society” did raze much of the cultural landscape, denuding it not only of traditional values and institutions, but also of failed socialist efforts, leaving China ready for the seeds of capitalist development.
Mao’s revolution fueled countless rectification movements and campaigns that inverted the once-inviolate primacy of ruler over ruled, scholar over worker, husband over wife, father over son, and family over individual.
By the time of the reforms of the 1980’s and 1990’s, bonds tying individuals to culture, the state, the work unit, and household-registration systems, for example, had largely unraveled.
The path had been cleared for a vast new population of atomized entrepreneurs and laborers, freed from fealty to family and Party, to storm the marketplace with newly liberated individual energy.
Environmental damage has been staggering, the gap between rich and poor has been growing, and urbanization – with all its attendant problems – has surged.
And, at least so far, the boom has not induced the systemic political changes for which many hoped.
But still, a key question remains unanswered: why did China’s boom happen?
This is one of the great questions of our time, relevant not only to China’s future, but to scores of other developing countries enthralled by China’s extraordinary, but still largely unexplained, success.
PHILADELPHIA – Scholars and journalists have tirelessly covered the rise of populist nationalism in Europe, and especially the hardline governments in Hungary and Poland.
With a few hours and a lot of googling, one can learn much about how both countries’ governments have commandeered public media, cracked down on privately owned TV stations and newspapers, weakened constitutional courts, attacked immigrants, promoted hate speech against Jews, Muslims, and other minority groups, and unleashed online trolls.
But one would still be unable to answer the fundamental question: Why are these governments so popular?
The answer is one that most analysts have overlooked: these governments are not only nationalist; they are also socialist.
Consider Poland, where the ruling Law and Justice (PiS) party won 38% of the vote in the October 2015 parliamentary election.
In April 2018, despite mounting authoritarianism and official complaints from the European Union, opinion polls put support for the far-right PiS at 40%.
The PiS does not owe its rising popularity to its anti-immigrant stance alone.
In fact, the Catholic nationalist right has won around 30% of the vote in Polish elections since 1989 with consistently anti-Semitic, anti-EU, anti-immigrant, and anti-Russian appeals.
PiS is led, at least superficially, by younger politicians, including President Andrzej Duda and Prime Minister Mateusz Morawiecki, who succeeded Beata Szydło (also a relatively new face in Polish politics).
In 2015, PiS won its usual base, plus an additional 5-10% of more moderate voters.
And, having lured these moderates, PiS has kept them, by offering what previous governments have rejected.
Although the Civic Platform, which governed until 2015, grew out of the Solidarity movement of the 1980s, it betrayed its working-class base by pursuing radical neoliberal economic policies that increased economic inequality.
The former communist party, having embraced social democracy in the 1990s, betrayed its roots in the same way.
By contrast, PiS has established the most significant addition to the Polish social safety net since 1989: the Family 500+ program.
Launched in 2016, Family 500+ embodies the nationalism, traditional family values, and social consciousness that the PiS seeks to promote.
The program pays families 500 złoty ($144) per month to provide care for a second or subsequent child.
Except for poor families, a family with only one child receives nothing, while families with two children qualify for the monthly benefit.
Families with three children get 1,000 złoty, and 500 złoty for each additional child.
Some 2.4 million families took advantage of it in the first two years.
The benefit, equivalent to 40% of the minimum wage, has almost wiped out extreme poverty for children in Poland, reducing it by an estimated 70-80%.
They complain that such a generous family benefit will weaken work incentives and blow up the government budget.
It has also reversed the post-communist decline in fertility, increased wages (particularly for women), and enabled families to buy school materials, take vacations, buy more clothes for their kids, and rely less on high-priced credit for basic household needs.
And, thanks to rapid economic growth, the government deficit has steadily fallen, not grown.
Many Poles see a government that finally does something for ordinary people, and all liberals can do is complain, ironically, that it is anti-democratic.
Poland’s fertility rate – which had fallen after 1989 to among the lowest in Europe – has risen since 2016 from 1.29 to 1.42 births per female.
In its first year, Family 500+ provided a significant stimulus to the economy, as poor families spend nearly all of the benefit on consumer items.
Instead of borrowing to pay for the expensive “school sets” students are required to purchase, Poles used their 500+ benefits instead.
And while women’s employment rates decreased as women left minimum-wage jobs, salaries, particularly for store clerks, rose sharply.
Lithuania introduced a less generous version of Family 500+ in 2018.
Those who care about democracy in Poland, Hungary, and elsewhere in Europe and beyond should acknowledge that many voters are buying into the nationalist right’s vision of a social state that advances national priorities, cares for the poor, and supports families.
But they can and should slip their own ideological blinders and learn a thing or two from their adversaries about policies that work for the people.
In the current debate about policy towards Iraq, two extreme alternatives are usually presented: either extend the military campaign against terrorism to Iraq, or maintain the current uneasy status quo with that country.
Pious talk about reworking the UN sanctions is another version of the second alternative - that is, of doing nothing.
Yet preparing a ground war against Iraq - finishing off the unfinished business of the 1991 Gulf War - is a high risk strategy.
Arab countries, already questionable allies in the war against fellow Muslims in Afghanistan, will be even less reliable in a war against fellow Arabs.
It means that the Iraqi people will continue to suffer - both from Saddam's brutalities, as well as from the consequences of the sanctions caused by his continued rule.
Moreover, it would continue to send the wrong message to would-be terrorists: you can get away with murder.
The perceived weakness of the US after the embassy bombings in East Africa and the attack on the destroyer the USS Cole no doubt contributed to the audacity of the attacks of September 11 th .
Other options, however, do exist and a combination of them could help bring down Saddam without necessarily engaging in outright military action.
By this I do not mean the loudmouthed but totally ineffective so-called Iraqi Opposition.
The local forces to be encouraged - by special operations people and the provision of arms and training - are the leaders of the southern Shi'a and the northern Kurds.
In the latter case, the infrastructure for support already exists, though it was partially dismantled during the Clinton administration.
In the Shi'a south, still reeling from the brutal suppression of the ill-fated 1991 rebellion, contacts must be created and networks established.
Iraq's neighbors - Saudi Arabia in the south and Turkey in the north - must be reassured that Shi'a and Kurdish rebellion will not result in the dismantling of Iraq and a change of borders: both countries have legitimate concerns regarding this issue.
With the current much more open regime in Teheran, Riyadh can also be convinced that the dangers from an Iranian-controlled Shi'a entity in southern Iraq are less formidable now than they were in 1991.
On the other hand, the cozy relationship that now exists between Jordan and Saddam must be addressed, with all sensitivity to Jordan's dilemmas.
Saddam has been masterful at filling most crucial positions in the army and security services with people who come from his Tikriti clan.
But they are far from being a monolithic group: enmity, jealously, anger over the past brutalities and injustices visited upon many of their kin may make some generals and colonels open to suggestions of a coup.
Those suggestions should be premised on a two level approach: first, the US, with UN support, should create a war crimes tribunal to judge Saddam and his top generals: they should know that come the day of reckoning, they will be hunted down like Milosevic and his minions.
One major indictment should deal with the use of poison gas against Kurdish rebels in Halabja during the time of the Iran/Iraq war.
Parallel to this, and the encouragement of insurrections in Iraq's south and the north, preparations for a military option should be credibly enhanced.
But with the stick should come a carrot: with good intelligence, some Iraqi generals and colonels should be approached with offers of amnesty and support should they decide to try to topple Saddam.
Failure to act, they should be told in no uncertain terms, will leave them exposed (like Saddam) to an indictment by in an international war crimes tribunal once Saddam's rule is brought to an end.
They should also be offered the lifting of sanctions on Iraq provided that they - after getting rid of Saddam - accept the resumption of a UN inspection regime.
Even if this will not immediately bring Saddam's regime down, such active attempts at undermining his rule will certainly make Saddam nervous, and as Ceausescu and Milosevic have shown, nervous dictators make fatal mistakes.
One premise underlies this entire line of thought: to imagine that there is a democratic alternative to Saddam, or that once he disappears there will be a democratic transition in Iraq, is to entertain dangerous illusions.
The only alternative to Saddam's regime is some sort of military rule, but one less oppressive and relatively more open.
It must certainly be committed to a foreign and internal policy not based on terrorism and thuggery and a Saddam-like quest for weapons of mass destruction.
Here, undoubtedly, is a complicated strategy, and one with its own inherent pitfalls.
One key advantage of it is that such an approach has a real chance of gaining support, albeit sometimes tacit, from Arab countries - and from Europe and Russia as well.
Such a calibrated approach, however, combining a differentiated understanding of the nature of Saddam's regime and its weaknesses, has a better chance of success than an outright assault, or the dangers inherent in allowing Saddam to remain in power.
The successes in Afghanistan call for an equally nuanced and sophisticated approach in regard to Iraq.
BERLIN – European security, to the surprise of many, is under threat once again.
Even before the Ukraine conflict began in 2014, there were growing signs of a brewing confrontation between rival blocs.
This new confrontation, however, is not defined by antagonism between communism and capitalism, but by a dispute over social and political order – a dispute about freedom, democracy, the rule of law and human rights – as well as by a struggle for geopolitical spheres of influence.
Russia’s annexation of Crimea violated international law and called into question the very foundations of Europe’s security architecture.
Moreover, the nature of conflict, as Ukraine has demonstrated, has changed dramatically.
So-called hybrid warfare and non-state actors are playing ever-greater roles.
New technologies – offensive cyber capabilities, armed drones, robots, and electronic, laser, and standoff weapons – carry new dangers.
New combat scenarios – smaller units, higher fighting power, faster deployment – are not covered by today’s existing arms-control regimes.
Ever since the Harmel Report, which redefined NATO strategy back in 1967, the West has followed a two-track approach to its relations with Russia: deterrence and détente.
NATO renewed its commitment to this dual strategy at its Warsaw Summit earlier this summer.
We adopted the necessary measures to provide military reassurance, and at the same time reaffirmed our political responsibility for cooperative security in Europe.
This dual approach is subject to an inherent difficulty: deterrence is real and visible to everyone; but détente must also be real and visible if it is to play its part.
Whenever this policy balance is lost, misperceptions arise, and little remains to counteract the risk of escalation.
To mitigate this risk, we should advance a concrete goal: the re-launch of arms control in Europe as a tried and tested means of risk-reduction, transparency, and confidence building between Russia and the West.
Arms-control agreements, history has demonstrated, are not the result of existing trust – they are a means to build trust where it has been lost.
In 1962, the Cuban Missile Crisis brought the world to the brink of nuclear confrontation.
Soon after the crisis – when the US-Soviet relationship was at an all-time low – both superpowers decided that it was time to work across the divide, through small and concrete steps.
This principle was also at the heart of Willy Brandt’s Neue Ostpolitik in the 1960s and 1970s.
Today, new and deep rifts have opened up between Russia and the West, and I fear we will not be able to close them in the near future, however hard we try.
No one should underestimate the challenges we face in this regard, especially given manifold crises – in eastern Ukraine, Syria, Libya, and elsewhere – at a time when we are not immune from renewed escalation or further setbacks.
Only one thing is certain: If we don’t try, peace in Europe and beyond will be tenuous.
So we should heed the lesson of détente: however deep the rifts, we must try to build bridges.
Unfortunately, the existing arms-control and disarmament regimes are crumbling.
Russia is no longer implementing the Treaty on Conventional Armed Forces in Europe, which led to the removal of tens of thousands of tanks and heavy weapons from Europe in the years after 1990.
Likewise, the transparency and confidence-building mechanisms enshrined in the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe’s 2011 Vienna Document have grown increasingly ineffective, and Russia opposes the steps needed to modernize them.
The OSCE’s Treaty on Open Skies, too, is being limited in its application.
And Russia’s annexation of Crimea has rendered obsolete the Budapest Memorandum.
The trust that was carefully accumulated through decades of hard work has been squandered.
Yet, at the same time, Russia has repeatedly called for a new debate on conventional arms control in Europe.
Re-launching conventional arms control should be based on a principle that was at the heart of Brandt’s Ostpolitik: security in Europe must not be framed as a permanently adversarial process.
Increased security for one side must not be perceived by the other side as reducing its own security.
So, in my view, a re-launch of arms control must cover five areas.
· define regional ceilings, minimum distances, and transparency measures (especially in militarily sensitive regions such as the Baltics);
· take into account new military capabilities and strategies (smaller, mobile units, rather than traditional, large armies, taking resources such as transport capabilities into consideration accordingly);
· permit effective, rapidly deployable, flexible, and independent verification in times of crisis (carried out by, say, the OSCE);
On these complex issues, we want to launch a structured dialogue with all those who share responsibility for European security.
The OSCE, which Germany is chairing this year, is one important forum for such a dialogue.
It’s not certain that such an undertaking can succeed at a time when world order is eroding and relations with Russia are strained.
True, Russia has violated basic principles of peace – territorial integrity, free choice of alliances, and recognition of international law – that are non-negotiable for us in the West.
But we must likewise be united in seeking to avoid an upward spiral of antagonism and confrontation.
Islamist terrorism, savage conflicts in the Middle East, failing states, and the refugee crisis imply risks for all Europe.
By re-launching arms control we can make a tangible offer of cooperation to all those who want to shoulder responsibility for Europe’s security.
BEIJING – The Chinese Communist Party has released the final document of the Third Plenum of the 18th Central Committee.
In the CCP’s history, the third plenum has traditionally been the occasion for the party to announce its major policies for the next 5-10 years.
This year happened to be one of leadership transition, so the third plenum became more important.
As expected, its final document unveils a plan for comprehensive reforms that will reshape China’s economy and society in the next decade.
For starters, the household registration (hukou) system will be reformed.
Small cities and towns will allow migrants to apply for the local hukou with no strings attached, and medium-size cities will do the same, with some restrictions.
Although large cities will remain as closed as ever, the new policy will dramatically weaken the institutional foundation of China’s long history of urban-rural and regional divides.
Similarly, the one-child policy that has been enforced for the last 34 years will be modified.
In most provinces, parents who are both single children themselves already can have two children.
The new policy recommends that provinces allow couples to have two children if either parent is a single child.
While this will affect only around 10 million couples – a small number in a country of more than 1.3 billion people – the reform represents a gigantic step toward ending the one-child rule.
Farmers, moreover, will be granted the right to sell their residential land on the open market and will be much more likely to be compensated at market rates when their land is taken by the government.
State-owned enterprises (SOEs), meanwhile, are expected to surrender more of their profits to the government – up to 30% by 2020.
This extra revenue will be used to finance China’s social-security system.
Indeed, from now on, the central government will take over social-security expenditure, establishing nationally unified pension and health-insurance systems, while the retirement age will be raised gradually.
Currently, women can retire at the age of 50, and men at 55 – ridiculously low by global standards and clearly unsustainable, given China’s rapidly aging population.
Their ability to stifle innovation will be weakened by a drastic reduction in the government’s power to restrict the entry of new competitors into all areas of the economy, as well as a major effort to reduce bureaucratic red tape.
Financial liberalization, too, will be deepened, which will help startups and private firms most of all.
In addition to pledging to liberalize exchange and interest rates, the final document also calls for allowing domestic private capital to form small and medium-size banks.
And, in an effort to bring coherence to commercial courts’ rulings, the court system will be directly financed by the central government, rather than by the corresponding local government.
But the third plenum also provided surprises, including the creation of a leading group within the CCP to steer reform.
China used to have a reform commission within the executive branch; the establishment of the leading group indicates the CCP’s commitment, and that of President Xi Jinping, to comprehensive reform.
In the past, government direction was emphasized, despite an acknowledgement of the market’s positive role.
Now, for the first time, the CCP is officially calling for “allowing the market to take a central role in resource allocation.”
A final surprise is that the document sets a timeframe to complete all of the reforms; by 2020, China is supposed to become a full-fledged market economy.
This is the first time in recent history that the CCP has set a specific deadline for policymaking.
And yet, while all of these measures are encouraging signs, some key items are missing.
Likewise, though the document calls for strengthening local legislatures, it proposes no concrete plan to curb local governments’ role in economic activities, which is one of the sources of distortions in the Chinese economy.
This is related to the final document’s most significant lacuna: political reform.
In fact, a Singapore-style approach – combining a freewheeling market economy and an authoritarian regime – has clearly emerged from the plenum.
Singapore is a city-state of five million people – roughly the population of the Haidian district of Beijing.
Given China’s much greater size and complexity, the Chinese government’s pursuit of the Singaporean model, with its suppression of any and all social disorder, would ultimately undermine economic dynamism.
To build the innovative economy envisioned by the third plenum, the CCP’s leadership needs to find a new governance model that fosters a vibrant society.
Sooner rather than later, the crucially important economic reforms that have just been unveiled will not be enough.
MOSCOW – In 2007, when Russian President Vladimir Putin traveled to Guatemala City to support his country’s bid to host this year’s Winter Olympics in Sochi, he knew that winning would be the easiest step in the process.
Many joked that only Russia would propose a subtropical seaside resort for a winter-sports competition.
But, while concerns about a lack of snow in the surrounding mountains, or about Russia’s ability to build the needed infrastructure in time, have gradually receded since Russia was awarded the games, one major apprehension has remained: the threat of terrorism.
Sochi is located in the North Caucasus region, which, following the Soviet Union’s dissolution, experienced a long and brutal armed insurgency in Chechnya, while neighboring Dagestan, in particular, later became a hotbed of Islamist extremism and terrorism.
In fact, Putin gained widespread support among the Russian people through his decisive and ruthless handling of separatism in the North Caucasus – support that helped persuade then-President Boris Yeltsin to appoint Putin as his successor in 1999.
Once in office, Putin – with a military victory and a policy of reconciliation – managed to pacify Chechnya, leaving it more a feudal khanate associated with Russia than a real part of the Russian Federation.
As a result, for the last dozen years, there has been peace with – and within – Chechnya.
As the war in Chechnya was drawing to a close in 2002, hundreds of people in a Moscow theater were taken hostage by terrorists from the North Caucasus.
Similarly, in 2004, hundreds of schoolchildren in Beslan, North Ossetia, were seized by an armed group.
In 2005, armed Islamists seized Nalchik, a regional capital in the North Caucasus, and held it for a day.
In 2010, at least 40 people died in two explosions in the Moscow metro set off by suicide bombers from Dagestan.
The following year, 37 people were killed in a similar fashion at Moscow’s Domodedovo airport.
The attacks have continued, despite Putin’s stated willingness to authorize strikes against suspected terrorists, “wherever they may be.”
It is fair to say that terrorists have been at war with Russia almost from the very moment the Soviet Union dissolved.
But it is no longer a fight for independence for a particular region in the Caucasus; instead, it is a fight to establish a “Caucasus caliphate” based on Sharia law.
Their tactic of choice is no longer armed insurgency, as in the 1990’s, or raids by groups of militants, as in the 2000’s, but individual acts of terror.
The targets range from police stations and liquor stores in the Caucasus to mainstream Muslim clerics in Tatarstan to ordinary people elsewhere in Russia.
The Tsarnaev brothers – responsible for last year’s Boston Marathon bombings – exemplify this brand of terrorism, aimed at modern secular society in general, whether in Russia or elsewhere.
It has been clear from the beginning that the Sochi Olympics, which epitomize everything that the terrorists oppose, would be a likely target.
The recent bombings in Volgograd, in southern Russia, and Pyatigorsk, in the North Caucasus – which claimed three dozen lives – were probably designed to send the message to Russians that they are defenseless, while communicating to the rest of the world that Sochi is too dangerous to visit.
Some have canceled their trips to Sochi, despite the international community’s condemnation of the attacks and vow to defy terrorism.
US Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel recently told reporters that the US, working with Russian security officials, will be prepared to extract Americans from Sochi in the event of an attack.
But the fact is that Sochi is perhaps the best-protected place in Russia today.
With Putin’s personal standing at stake, the top priority of Russia’s police and security services is to ensure that the games proceed without incident.
This raises another risk: with major law-enforcement assets deployed in or near Sochi, terrorists might try to strike elsewhere during the Olympics.
After all, Russia is a vast country, and the terrorist cells are small and notoriously difficult to penetrate, partly because they often use primitive modes of communication that are difficult to detect.
And, while international cooperation to combat terrorism is useful, its impact is constrained by suspicion and mistrust, as the Boston Marathon bombings highlighted.
Parallel to the Sochi Olympics, another contest is already underway between the terrorists who seek to disrupt the games, or at least mar the atmosphere surrounding them, and the forces of the Russian state, whose task is to thwart the terrorists’ plans.
LAGOS – In May, global food prices increased 1.2%, reaching their highest level since October 2017.
This upward trajectory is having a disproportionate impact in Africa, where the share of household income spent on food is also rising.
To ensure food security, governments must work quickly to reverse these trends, and one place to start is by policing the producers who are feeding the frenzy.
According to data compiled by the World Economic Forum, four of the world’s top five countries in terms of food expenditure are in Africa.
Nigeria leads the list, with a staggering 56.4% of household income in 2015 spent on food, followed by Kenya (46.7%), Cameroon (45.6%), and Algeria (42.5%).
By comparison, consumers in the United States spend the least globally (6.4%), far less than people in emerging economies like Brazil (16%) and India (30%).
As Africa urbanizes, people are buying more imported semi- or fully processed foods, which cost more than locally produced foods.
But the primary cause is poor public policy: African governments have failed to curb the power of agribusinesses and large food producers, a lack of oversight that has made local agriculture less competitive.
The absence of antitrust laws, combined with weak consumer protection, means that in many countries, only two or three major companies control markets for items like salt, sugar, flour, milk, oil, and tea .
The impact is most pronounced in African cities, where prices for white rice, frozen chicken, bread, butter, eggs, and even carbonated soft drinks are at least 24% higher than in other cities around the world.
These prices hit consumers both directly and indirectly (owing to pass-through of higher input costs by food conglomerates and service providers).
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has long argued that food security and fair pricing depends on markets that are free from monopolistic tendencies.
The OECD concurs, and has frequently called on authorities to address “anti-competitive mergers, abuse of dominance, cartels and price fixing, vertical restraints, and exclusive practices” in the food sector.
And yet, in many African countries, this advice has rarely been heeded.
Between 1997 and 2004, for example, the FAO counted 122 allegations of “anti-competitive practices” in 23 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Violations included a “vertical monopoly” in the Malawi sugar sector, price fixing in Kenya’s fertilizer industry, and a “buyer cartel” in the Zimbabwean cotton industry.
And, despite the considerable attention such cases have received, the underlying problems persist.
According to the World Bank, more than 70% of African countries rank in the bottom half globally for efforts to protect “market-based competition.”
While 27 African countries and five regional blocs do have antitrust laws on the books, enforcement is rare.
The remaining countries have no regulations at all and have made little progress in drafting them.
Since 1998, the country’s Competition Act has prohibited any company controlling at least 45% of the market from excluding other firms or seeking to exercise control over pricing.
Violators face penalties of up to 10% of their earnings, and during the last two decades, some of the biggest companies in the country – including Tiger Brands, Pioneer Foods, and Sime Darby – have been penalized.
As Tembinkosi Bonakele, head of South Africa’s Competition Commission, noted last year, the government is “determined to root out exploitation of consumers by cartels,” especially in the food industry.
Companies and special-interest groups will always seek to benefit from the absence of regulation.
The need for reform is greatest in countries like Nigeria and Ghana, where food expenditures are high and food-industry pressure is most pronounced.
Babatunde Irukera, Director General of the Consumer Protection Council in Nigeria, recently asserted that, “In a large vibrant and loyal market such as Nigeria, the absence of broad competition regulation is tragic.
Unregulated markets in competition context constitute the otherwise ‘legitimate’ vehicle for both financial and social extortion.”
Reducing the prices of staple food by even a modest 10% (far below the average premium cartels around the world charge) by tackling anticompetitive behavior in these sectors, or by reforming regulations that shield them from competition, could lift 270,000 people in Kenya, 200,000 in South Africa, and 20,000 in Zambia out of poverty.
Such a policy would save households in these countries over $700 million (2015 US dollars) a year, with poor households gaining disproportionately more than rich ones.
Ultimately, it is the responsibility of political leaders to protect consumers from collusion and price-fixing.
There is no question that Africa’s businesses need space to innovate and grow, but their success should never come at the cost of someone else’s next meal.
SHANGHAI – China has achieved some four decades of rapid economic growth.
But one powerful source of growth has yet to be fully tapped: urbanization.
Now, the potential of megacities as an engine of dynamism and increased prosperity is finally getting the high-level attention it deserves.
Over the last decade, China has been working to shift from a manufacturing-led growth model fueled by low-cost labor to an innovation-led, higher-value-added model underpinned by strong productivity gains.
Urbanization will be critical to facilitate this shift, not least by enabling economies of scale.
Currently, though China is the world’s most populous country and its second-largest economy, only half the population lives in urbanized areas, and less than 10% reside permanently in megacities.
Growth in China’s megacities – metropolitan areas with a population exceeding ten million – has long been heavily constrained by rigid state administrative divisions and planning agencies.
Indeed, in pursuing rapid industrialization, megacities have often been less successful than smaller cities – which have largely evaded such constraints – in accumulating productive capital, attracting foreign direct investment (FDI), and demonstrating entrepreneurial spirit.
In the 1990s, the small city of Kunshan became China’s leading center for manufacturing electronic products.
By integrating themselves into global supply chains, small cities in Guangdong province – including Dongguan, Huizhou, Shunde, and Zhongshan – have played a critical role in establishing China as the “Factory of the World.”
But while the success of smaller cities is to be celebrated, it is China’s megacities where the greatest potential to fuel future progress in productivity – and thus GDP growth – is to be found.
So far, China has just four “first-tier” cities (with populations exceeding 20 million): Beijing, Shanghai, Guangzhou, and Shenzhen.
Given the size of China’s population and economy, that is not a lot.
And, in fact, there is no reason to believe that these megacities have reached their capacity, in terms of population or contribution to economic growth.
Moreover, China has many dynamic second-tier cities – such as Chengdu, Tianjin, Hangzhou, Wuhan, and Suzhou – that are capable of reaching first-tier status, if given the chance.
In order to maximize the potential of China’s cities, the government will need to be much more adaptive and flexible, especially regarding its notoriously strict control of urban land-development ratios.
In particular, China must abandon its land-quota system, which not only limits the amount of land cities can develop for future productivity growth, but also allocates a disproportionate share of land to factories.
Otherwise, urbanization will continue pushing up already-high housing costs, but not efficiently enough to power sustained growth and development.
The good news is that local governments are already working with the central government to alleviate or even eliminate existing administrative constraints.
In China, cities’ administratively defined boundaries include both urban and rural jurisdictions, with the latter – called the “county” – engaged mainly in agriculture.
For example, about half of Shanghai’s administrative jurisdiction of 6,340 square kilometers (2,448 square miles) is rural.
Local governments are now introducing so-called county-district conversions, in order to expand urban districts into rural jurisdictions.
Such efforts, which the central government broadly supports, will enable more housing construction and industrial and commercial expansion.
Another strategy for advancing China’s transition toward a city-led growth model is to expand the role played by urban clusters that leverage the strength of first-tier cities to boost growth in less-developed areas.
From an economic standpoint, the Yangtze and Pearl River Deltas – which encompass megacities like Guangzhou, Shanghai, and Shenzhen – are undoubtedly the most important such urban agglomerations, set to generate the higher future productivity gains from economies of scale and complementarity.
This past March, Chinese Premier Li Keqiang announced a plan for the development of a city cluster in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Greater Bay Area, which covers nine cities, including Guangzhou and Shenzhen, as well as the special administration regions of Hong Kong and Macau.
From 2010 to 2016, the annual GDP of the Greater Bay Area soared from CN¥5.42 trillion ($82 billion) to CN¥9.35 trillion ($1.42 trillion), making it the world’s third-largest urban economy, after Tokyo and New York.
Yet the population of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Greater Bay Area is growing fast, and its GDP per capita is less than half that of Tokyo, suggesting that its potential is nowhere near depleted.
Moreover, China’s leaders seem to be eyeing a second greater bay area, centered on Hangzhou Bay, which, because it overlaps with the Yangtze River Delta, could go a long way toward integrating that already-prosperous region.
Such a cluster could cover the coastal megacity of Shanghai, as well as about ten more important cities across the Zhejiang and Jiangsu provinces.
It would include world-class ports, such as the Port of Ningbo-Zhoushan (the world’s busiest in terms of cargo tonnage).
And it would cover two of China’s 11 existing free-trade zones.
The result would be a bay area on the scale of San Francisco and Tokyo.
The pace of China’s economic growth over the last four decades has been unprecedented.
As it upgrades its economy to become more knowledge-based and technology-driven, it is again leveraging its strengths.
There is no better example of this than the ongoing effort to tap the potential of megacities.
MOSCOW – Twenty years ago, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev resigned, the Soviet Union ended, and Russia began an imperfect transition to democratic capitalism – a transition that has proven to be far more difficult than expected.
And yet the recent protests – somewhat similar to those that preceded the end of the Soviet Union – provide grounds for cautious optimism about the future.
So, what lessons can we draw from the successes and failures of Russia’s last two decades of post-Soviet transition?
The first lesson is that market competition, responsible macroeconomic policy, and private enterprise generally work.
While high commodity prices played a part, privatized and new enterprises were the fastest-growing part of Russia’s post-communist economy, and the government played an important role by ensuring macroeconomic stability, maintaining a balanced budget, and using oil revenues to create significant foreign-currency reserves.
Second, a market economy needs strong political and legal institutions to protect property rights and competition.
Such institutions are difficult to build from scratch, and doing so is not merely a technocratic task; it requires political change.
Contrary to popular belief, Russia’s reformers understood this challenge from the start.
They created a completely new judiciary and tax system, established fiscal federalism, and introduced an independent central bank, an antitrust agency, and many other institutions.
But they also knew that these institutions would work effectively only if there was political demand for them – and that this could come only from private owners, a critical mass of which thus had to be created as soon as possible.
But, because privatization took place before corruption was rooted out, it involved substantial abuses, which undermined popular support for private property.
The reformers’ arguments eventually gained ground: most of Vladimir Putin’s reforms during his first presidential term were promoted and even designed by the new capitalists.
Private land ownership was introduced, the tax system was streamlined, the business environment was deregulated, a stabilization fund was created, deposit insurance was implemented, and credit-history bureaus were established.
But the unpopularity of privatization also provided support for Putin’s model of state capitalism.
Following nationalizations (both overt and through acquisition by state-owned companies), Russia’s government has regained control over the commanding heights of the economy.
Russia’s state capitalism is different from a planned economy, because government-owned companies are supposed to compete in the marketplace and act similarly to private firms.
Critics of state capitalism have always pointed out the risk of government capture by such companies’ managers, which is exactly what has happened in Russia, where the state-owned companies have grown so large that it is difficult to distinguish between them and the state itself.
Not surprisingly, government policy has supported these companies through regulation and subsidies, thereby protecting them from competition.
Nor is it surprising that these companies failed to eliminate inefficiencies and raise productivity.
This largely explains why annual economic growth slowed from 7% in 1998-2008 to 4% in 2010-2011.
Moreover, expansion of state companies drastically reduced demand for market institutions, eliminating corruption, and improving the business climate.
In the second half of the 2000’s, as Russian state capitalism came into its own, previous anti-corruption gains were reversed, and the business climate deteriorated to the point that capital flight now stands at about 4% of GDP.
That is a stunning figure, given high oil prices, abundant investment opportunities, and the nearly moribund US and European economies – the main recipients of Russia’s fleeing capital.
In short, the third main lesson of Russia’s transition is that state capitalism does not work (at least not without a strong meritocratic political party, as in China).
As market reforms have brought substantial prosperity (average annual per capita GDP, at purchasing power parity, is now $17,000), a large middle class, based mostly in small and medium-size companies and the service sector, developed beyond the reach of the state-owned behemoths.
Most of this middle class also lives in large cities – where the battle for Russia’s future is now taking place.
Its representatives understand that they must win the battle against corruption or leave the country, as they would have no future in Russia otherwise.
That is why they have rallied around the young blogger Alexei Navalny, whose WikiLeaks-like anti-corruption campaign has brought forth evidence of billions of dollars stolen from state-owned companies, luxury limousines bought by officials, and spectacular business careers by the ruling elite’s “wunderkinder” sons and daughters.
The evidence of corruption produced by Navalny, and the nickname he gave to Putin’s political party, United Russia (the “party of crooks and thiefs”), was perhaps the single most important factor underlying United Russia’s loss of its parliamentary majority in December’s general election.
Moreover, massive electoral fraud galvanized middle-class grievances, driving tens of thousands of protesters into the streets.
Ironically, the wave of protests since then is consistent with the “modernization hypothesis” that Putin’s government has always used to justify the rollback of democracy in Russia: democracy is sustainable only if society is sufficiently well-off and has a solid middle class; until then, centralized rule is needed.
Now, it seems, sufficient prosperity has arrived, calling forth a middle class solid enough to demand government accountability, the rule of law, and a genuine fight against corruption.
Whatever happens in the March 2012 presidential elections, the political mobilization of the middle class will eventually lead to democratization.
The sheer volume of false utterances and outright lies spewed during the United States’ presidential election campaign implies a growing disdain for factual knowledge, as does the proliferation of fake news disseminated without journalistic filters on social-media platforms such as Facebook and Twitter.
By the time of the United Kingdom’s Brexit referendum in June, experts had already been deemed dispensable.
With elites everywhere being accused of neglecting “real” people, frustration and anger are now trumping fact-based deliberation.
In a climate of anxiety, confusion, and nostalgia for a fantastical past, raw emotion prevails.
The rules of public discourse become obsolete, and the open horizon of possible futures is narrowed to a single escape route that fear-mongers portray as the only way forward.
This is a poor way to cope with uncertainty, and it stands in striking contrast to the methods of science and free inquiry.
In science, uncertainty is a powerful incentive for acquiring knowledge; indeed, it is the primary motivation for research, which is inherently uncertain.
Scientists conducting fundamental research cannot predict what they will find or when they will find it.
Many important discoveries are a result of serendipity: researchers find something unexpected that they were not looking for, but which they quickly recognize as significant.
The scientific community rigorously seeks consensus about knowledge produced so far, but it knows that there is still much more to be discovered.
All scientific knowledge is therefore preliminary, and will be extended, complemented, or replaced by new knowledge.
At the same time, science and technology have enabled us to anticipate risks and identify additional unknowns.
So, the more we know, the more we comprehend what we do not know.
But, whereas the scientific community embraces uncertainty, remains ever curious, and is confident about the power of science and technology to create new opportunities for mankind’s collective future, other segments of society do not necessarily share this outlook.
There can be a fine line between experts’ prerogative to make technical judgments and non-experts’ prerogative to assess the consequences of those judgments.
When people translate knowledge into action, they initiate new interactions within complex systems, without necessarily knowing what the final consequences of those actions will be.
What we need now are more refined mathematical tools and simulation models to understand the hidden uncertainties that can emerge from interactions in complex social and natural systems.
Past civilizations adopted divinatory practices in an effort to know the future.
But, since then, humanity has made impressive strides away from believing in a predetermined destiny, and toward actively shaping the human condition.
Encouraged by the achievements of modern science, we came to perceive the future as being radically open.
Even though path dependencies, incomplete information, and cognitive biases can still frustrate human actions, we need no longer assume that past experiences must determine future outcomes.
The future is inherently uncertain, which means that the present always could have turned out different than it has.
It evolves and manifests itself in different ways: sometimes it challenges our assumptions and subverts our expectations; often, it takes us by surprise.
Because of uncertainty, our achievements are not always what we intended them to be, and our lives are never simply routine.
Our lives are probabilistic, not determined, and the more we realize this, the less we need to feel threatened by uncertainty.
Still, there is widespread disaffection today, and clever politicians are eager to exploit citizens’ anger.
If people feel engulfed by crises, and view the future as fragile and precarious, they will be reluctant to embrace uncertainty.
It alerts us to randomness in the physical and social world, and to the role that uncertainty plays in our communities and personal lives.
By revealing the messiness of the world that we have created – intentionally and unintentionally – it allows us to imagine how we can create that world anew, even as we accept that the future will remain open and uncertain.
NEW YORK – Imagine that Googling an address gave you a list of the closest buildings, ranked by distance.
You don't get what you actually want to finish your task; you get a list of pages that might lead you to it.
Even as the online world has turned its attention from searching to social networking, search is getting interesting again.
First came Yahoo!, with its carefully cultivated (by human editors) catalogue of interesting web pages.
Then along came Google, with co-founder Larry Page’s innovative ranking of Web pages not just by their content, but also by the quantity and quality of other pages that link to them.
People are likely to buy what their friends recommend, which is why marketers should spend time on social networks and join the conversation, rather than interrupt it with traditional advertising.
But what happens when, influenced by their friends, people actually go to buy something or take some action?
That long list of blue links to pages that may or may not contain what they want looks pretty old.
Now, however, something is happening to fix this, and it’s not just a prettier background.
It’s structure – the same sort of context the old Yahoo! catalogue supplied, but this time automatically generated and deeper – and across more than just a few categories such as sports and travel.
For example, what people want (and are now getting) in product search is not a list of pages, but a set of products displayed in some meaningful fashion.
The challenge of course, is that each kind of product has a different structure and a different set of attributes.
Consider wines: you can sort them by price, year, or region of origin, by red, white, or rosé, or by sparkling or still.
For clothes, you want sizes and colors – and perhaps some filters depending on your personal characteristics – and of course a “buy now” button.
To “map” travel properly, the software needs to understand such things as time zones, flight duration, layovers, and the like, along with concepts such as coach or first class, deluxe and standard rooms, double vs. single, and so on.
That is why there is a whole separate vertical market for travel, but one that first Bing, and now Google (with the acquisition of ITA Software), may be claiming.
For a long time Google didn’t need to do much to remain the leader in Internet search, focusing primarily on the “access” part of its self-proclaimed mission “to organize the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful.”
But runner-up Microsoft went out and bought Medstory in 2007 and then Powerset in 2008.
(I was an investor in both of them, so I have been watching these developments with interest, but I have no inside information on either company since the acquisitions.)
Medstory has a deep understanding of health care, including the relationships between diseases and treatments, drugs and symptoms, and side effects.
Powerset, a tool for creating and defining such relationships in any sphere of interest, is broader but less deep.
This all happened a couple of years ago – just before Yahoo! gave up on search entirely and handed that part of its business over to Microsoft.
Also around that time, Bill Gates uttered one of the smartest things he has ever said: “The future of search is verbs.”
To me, the meaning was clear: when people search, they aren't just looking for nouns or information; they are looking for action.
They want to book a flight, reserve a table, buy a product, cure a hangover, take a class, fix a leak, resolve an argument, or occasionally find a person, for which Facebook is very handy.
First, it bought ITA Software, which provides the underlying data to several travel-booking sites (Hotwire and Orbitz) and to Kayak, as well as to Bing.
Most resellers, a little nervous about Bing’s tool that sends users to book directly with airlines and hotels, are even more concerned about what Google might be up to.
Then, last month, Google acquired Metaweb and its user-generated database Freebase.
While Powerset was a tool for understanding natural language and for structuring it “under the covers” (where programmers could see it), Metaweb lets partners and end-users create data structures or add information to structures created by others.
For example, Metaweb/Freebase has an extensive structured database of movies, actors who appear in them, and their directors.
You can ask (and get the answer) to “movies directed by Roman Polanski” and get only those movies – not those in which he only appeared.
Other categories include business (with entities such as employers, industries, and employees), biology, space flight, and many more, and include representations – such as graphs, timelines, and tables – of how they are connected.
They have complex relationships to other things, and by representing that information using verbs – for example, “the company that Google acquired” vs. “the company that Google competes with” – we can represent the world more accurately.
LONDON – On the surface, mass illiteracy seems like an evil that should be easy to eradicate.
With funding for good teachers and schools, we can provide an education for all children.
And yet universal education has long eluded mankind, even when achieving it has been a globally shared objective.
Today, 750 million adults – two-thirds of them women – are illiterate, and 260 million children are not in school.
Education is a basic right codified in the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child.
It was further enshrined in the 1990 World Declaration on Education for All, at a summit in Jomtien, Thailand, and then at the 2000 World Education Forum in Dakar, Senegal.
Achieving universal primary education was one of the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals for 2015, and universal education has since been included in the Sustainable Development Goals for 2030.
But, despite these commitments, the international community has yet to deliver for the world’s children.
In addition to those who are not in school at all, 500 million children currently receive no more than a primary education, which itself is often inadequate.
And by 2030 – the year when the world has promised to provide universal primary and secondary education for all – an estimated 800 million people will enter adulthood without the qualifications necessary for the modern labor force.
In many regions of the world, educational standards fall far short of what is needed.
In Africa, for example, educational outcomes today are estimated to be 100 years behind those of a typical high-income country.
As a result, there is a deepening divide between the half of the world’s children who have access to a decent education and the half who do not.
Whereas an earlier generation managed to travel to the moon, our generation has failed even to provide a classroom for all of the children here on Earth.
To that end, the International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity, which I chaired, has launched the International Finance Facility for Education (IFFEd) as a declaration of war against mass illiteracy and the evils of child labor, child marriage, and discrimination against girls.
With discrimination and exploitation denying millions of girls the basic right to attend school, universal education is the civil-rights struggle of our generation.
The Education Commission is waging this war with the most innovative financing solutions we could devise.
The IFFEd is mobilizing both public and private funds, marshaling international cooperation, and leading a multinational partnership to make education accessible to all.
The IFFEd has brought universal education to the forefront of the World Bank’s plan to take development financing from “billions to trillions.”
In addition to multiplying donor funding, it is supporting countries that are committed to reforming their education systems, thus ensuring that every dollar goes toward delivering concrete results.
By facilitating the largest single investment in education in history, and by encouraging developing countries to spend more, the IFFEd could, over time, provide 20 million more classrooms for children around the world.
The World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development have each committed to using the IFFEd to leverage donations.
And these efforts will complement the work of The Global Partnership for Education, the Education Cannot Wait fund, and UN agencies operating in the area of education – UNESCO, UNICEF, UNOCHA, and UNHCR.
By requiring governments to increase their own investments in education as a condition for receiving donor funds, the IFFEd promises to create $4 worth of additional education resources for every $1 donated.
Our principal aim is to focus on the lower-middle-income African, Asian, and Latin American countries where the majority of out-of-school children – many of them refugees – now reside.
These countries are host to some 700 million children – the missing millions in the middle.
Unfortunately, less than 1% of development bank financing currently goes to education in African and Asian middle-income countries.
As a result, these countries are confronted with an untenable choice: either stop sending children to school, or borrow money at much higher rates and risk accruing unsustainable debts.
Looking ahead, it is time for donor countries to step up and respond to our requests for financial guarantees to the IFFEd.
We are currently in discussions with 20 possible contributors, underscoring the message that if we achieve universal education, per capita GDP in the poorest countries will be almost 70% higher by 2050 than if current trends continued.
The mortality reductions, measured in additional years of life, will be nearly equivalent to what could be expected if the world eliminated both HIV and malaria.
No less importantly, young people will be better prepared for the job market of the future.
They will be in a position to become the next generation of innovators, teachers, and leaders, and all will have the opportunity to realize their full potential.
Let this generation be the first in history to ensure that all children are afforded the education to which they have a fundamental right.
CAMBRIDGE – World oil prices, which have been highly volatile during the last decade, have fallen more than 50% over the past year.
The economic effects have been negative overall for oil-exporting countries, and positive for oil-importing countries.
If we care about environmental and other externalities, should we want oil prices to go up, because that will discourage oil consumption, or down because that will discourage oil production?
The answer is that countries should seek to do both: Lower the price paid to oil producers and raise the price paid by oil consumers, by cutting subsidies for oil and refined products or raising taxes on them.
Many emerging-market countries have taken advantage of falling oil prices to implement such reforms.
The United States, which is now surprisingly close to energy self-sufficiency, so that the macroeconomic effects roughly balance, should follow suit.
Consider this: America’s roads and bridges are crumbling, and the national transportation infrastructure requires investment and maintenance.
And yet the US Congress shamefully continues to evade its responsibility to fund the Federal Highway Trust Fund and put it on a sound long-term basis, owing to disagreement over how to pay for it.
The obvious solution, which economists have long advocated, is an increase in America’s gasoline taxes.
The federal gas tax has been stuck at 18.4 cents a gallon since 1993, the lowest among advanced countries.
And yet, on July 30, Congress adopted only a three-month stopgap measure, kicking the gas can down the road for the 35th time since 2009.
Fossil-fuel pricing is a striking exception to the general rule that if the government has only one policy instrument, it can achieve only one policy objective.
For starters, the money saved from a reduction in subsidies or an increase in taxes in the oil sector could be used either to reduce budget deficits or to fund desirable spending (such as US highway construction and maintenance).
At the same time, lower oil consumption would reduce traffic congestion and accidents, limit local air pollution and its adverse health effects, and lower greenhouse-gas emissions, which lead to global climate change.
Fuel taxes are a more efficient way to achieve these environmental goals than most of the alternatives.
High oil consumption leaves a country vulnerable to oil-market disruptions arising, for example, from instability in the Middle East.
If gas taxes are high and consumption is low, as in Europe, fluctuations in the world price of oil have a smaller effect domestically.
Subsidies to US oil producers have often been sold on national-security grounds; in fact, a policy to “drain America first” reduces self-sufficiency in the longer run.
Finally, although fuel subsidies are often misleadingly sold as a way to improve income distribution, the reality is more nearly the opposite.
Worldwide, fossil-fuel subsidies are regressive: far less than 20% of the payments benefit the poorest 20% of the population.
Poor people are not the ones who do most of the driving; rather, they tend to use public transportation (or walk).
The conventional wisdom is that it is politically impossible in the US to increase the gas tax.
Indeed, some developing-country governments have faced civil unrest, even coups, over fuel taxes or subsidies.
Yet Egypt, Ghana, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, and the United Arab Emirates have all reduced or abolished various fuel subsidies in the last year.
Besides raising taxes on fuel consumption, the US should also stop some of its subsidies for oil production.
Oil companies can immediately deduct a high percentage of their drilling costs from their tax liability, which other industries cannot do with their investments.
Likewise, the oil industry has often been able to drill on federal land and offshore without paying the full market rate for the leases.
Most politicians know that sound economics would call for these benefits to be eliminated; but those who complain the loudest that the government must not pick corporate winners and losers seem to be the least able to summon the political will to act.
A recent study by the International Monetary Fund estimated that global energy subsidies are running at more than $5 trillion per year, while fossil-fuel subsidies in the US have been conservatively valued at $37 billion per year (not including the cost of environmental externalities).
As leaders in emerging-market countries have recognized, falling oil prices represent the best opportunity to implement reform.
Governments that act now can reduce energy subsidies or increase taxes while sparing consumers an increase in the retail price from one year to the next.
For the US and other advanced countries, it is also a good time for reform from a macroeconomic standpoint.
In the past, countries had to worry that a rising fuel tax could become built into uncomfortably high inflation rates.
Currently, however, central bankers are not worried about inflation, except in the sense that they want it to be a little higher.
If other countries have found that what was politically impossible has suddenly turned out to be possible, why not the US?
The Cold War ended when the Soviet Union collapsed in 1991, and is now remembered only as history to most people around the world.
The Korean Peninsula, however, remains divided along ideological lines, and the two Koreas co-exist as living remnants of the Cold War.
A total of almost 1.5 million young soldiers from both North and South Korea face off against each across the heavily armed Demilitarized Zone.
Events and structural forces, however, have affected and changed the nature of the North Korean system since 1991.
The sudden discontinuation of the supply of petroleum and natural resources from Russia in the early 1990’s, the failure of the centrally-planned economy, and the subsequent massive famine in the mid-1990’s left North Korea’s leaders no alternative but to tolerate informal market activities.
The engagement policy pursued by the South Korean government in recent years also contributed to changes in North Koreans’ perceptions of the outside world and of their own abject economic situation.
In these desperate circumstances, North Korea’s leaders clung to their strategy of developing nuclear weapons as a last resort to defend the security of their regime.
But, regardless of whether the nuclear issue is resolved, the spread of market forces in North Korea will continue to change every aspect of life there in the coming years.
So, even before the recent reports of North Korean leader Kim Jong-il’s health problems, North Korea was already a country marked by growing uncertainty.
Nevertheless, the reports about Kim’s ill health hit like a rude wake-up call about the precarious nature of conditions in North Korea.
The “Dear Leader’s” declining health will add even more uncertainty and may cause international instability across East Asia.
For example, Kim Il Sung groomed his son Kim Jong-il as his successor for about two decades before the younger Kim took power in 1994.
Indeed, it is widely expected that a new system of collective leadership will emerge if Kim Jong-il is incapacitated.
In the last six decades, all power has been concentrated in the hands of one person.
One-man rule has been so completely embedded in North Korea’s political culture and system that it is difficult to expect collective leadership to succeed.
Thus, some type of power struggle, rather like what occurred in the Soviet Union following Stalin’s death, may invariably follow a brief period of collective rule.
The dilemma for the world is that major decisions will have to be made during this period of instability.
Will the North’s would-be leaders be able to manage the country’s stock of nuclear weapons responsibly and safely without transferring a few of them abroad, much less respond to international pressure to dismantle them in a reasonable and flexible manner?
Over the past decade, Kim Jong-il has emphasized the importance of his military-first policy.
As a result, the army will be dominant in decision making on important issues like nuclear negotiations.
But the problem with military rule is a tendency toward incomplete understanding of the implications of political decisions – a problem that will be aggravated further by collective leadership.
Under a North Korean collective leadership dominated by the military, the power of the country’s economic bureaucrats will be marginal, at best.
In such a difficult domestic situation, North Korea’s leaders may adopt more hostile policies to obtain economic aid from both South Korea and the United States.
Recently, South Korea’s government made it clear that it would continue to engage North Korea, but in a more principled way than had previous administrations.
This reflects a hardening of South Korean public opinion, following North Korea’s nuclear test in 2006.
As a result of this policy shift – and the recent killing of a South Korean tourist in North Korea’s Kumgang Mountains – official dialogue between North and South has stopped for the past several months.
International relations in northeast Asia will become more subtle and unstable as the Kim Jong-il era ends.
After six turbulent but somewhat predictable decades, we may be entering into a new era of greater turbulence but less predictability on the Korean Peninsula.
As summer beckons, we should take a moment to focus on the sun's dark side.
The source of all life on Earth, the sun is also a fountain of environmental carcinogens.
Specifically, we now know that the sun's ultraviolet radiation is the primary cause of most skin cancers.
Skin cancer, long thought to be a disease of little public health significance, has now become epidemic.
An estimated 90,000 new cases of malignant melanoma and well over one million cases of non-melanoma skin cancer will occur in the United States this year.
Melanoma will cause 8,000 deaths, and non-melanoma skin cancer will kill another 2,000.
Melanoma is now the most common cancer in women aged 24 to 35.
Once a disease of men in their fifties and sixties, it is not unusual for women in their twenties to develop basal cell cancer or squamous cell cancer.
While the incidence of skin cancer has risen dramatically, so has our understanding of its causes.
For over fifty years, ultraviolet radiation from the sun has been the number one suspected cause of skin cancer.
Epidemiologic data from Australia, animal studies with artificial sources of ultraviolet light, and the development of skin cancer in individuals with a genetic inability to correct the DNA damage caused by ultraviolet radiation provided circumstantial evidence of the connection.
Recent work has made the causal link between the sun and skin cancer at the molecular and cellular level.
Ultraviolet radiation causes specific and unique mutations in the tumor suppressor gene that produces a protein called p53.
This protein is involved in a process called apoptosis in which damaged cells commit "suicide" to ensure that their defective genes are not passed on to daughter cells.
(This is perhaps the first indication that self-sacrifice may be an intrinsic human trait!)
Damaged by the sun, but not quite able to commit suicide, the mutated cell continues to proliferate at the expense of normal surrounding cells, resulting in a pre-cancerous growth that can progress to a full-blown squamous cell carcinoma.
If our key message is "stay out of the sun forever," we are doomed to fail.
Creating a culture of cave dwellers is no way to decrease the incidence of skin cancer.
Moreover, in educating the public we confront formidable forces: cultural icons who are as bronze as the statuary in the Louvre, the sheer pleasure of being in the sun, and the perceived incremental health benefits of ultraviolet radiation.
The dearth of pale actors, actresses, corporate leaders, and politicians confirms that a tan is identified with health, wealth, and power, rather than the travails of the working class, as in the past.
The artificial tanning industry promises that ultraviolet radiation from their machines causes less damage than natural sunlight.
Microscopic pigment granules produced by skin pigment cells aggregate around the cell's nucleus to shield the DNA from the marauding rays and prevent mutation.
The inescapable irony is that teenagers and young women pursue a tan to look more attractive, but trade a moment or two of sunny radiance for a whole lifetime of premature wrinkles, fine lines, and haggard-looking skin.
As young people consider themselves immortal, not even appeals to lifelong vanity, let alone warnings about cancer, are sufficient to deter them from the tanning booths.
But the difficulties of educating the public about the causes of skin cancer do not diminish our obligation to try.
There are enough other diseases about which we do not have a clue as to the cause.
With skin cancer, we know very well how we can prevent it - and prevention is always easier than treatment.
A good place to start is to ensure that the public has access to accurate information.
While pseudoscience and the anti-aging industry represent an important source of potential misinformation, the Internet often provides damaging false information as well.
Amazingly, the Internet has the same level of credibility with the patient as television does with the consumer: "I read it on the Web, so it must be true."
While barbers, hairdressers, taxi drivers, bar owners, and doctors are often licensed, permits are rarely required to operate a tanning parlor.
None of the other professions listed above, however, knowingly exposes its clients to a confirmed environmental carcinogen.
Until the tanning industry chooses to police itself, customers should eschew the bulbs and pursue the spray: wear an artificial tan.
This preventable disease should be the focus of a comprehensive educational campaign similar to anti-smoking campaigns, which are now bearing fruit in many countries.
In addition, scientific research on this most accessible of human organs will continue to identify innovative treatments and modes of prevention, which may well become applicable to other cancers.
BRUSSELS – Central banks throughout the developed world have been overwhelmed by the fear of deflation.
They shouldn’t be: The fear is unfounded, and the obsession with it is damaging.
In 2013, decades of (gently) falling prices prompted the Bank of Japan to embark on an unprecedented monetary offensive.
But while headline inflation increased for a while, the factors driving that increase – a competitive depreciation of the yen and a tax increase – did not last long.
Now, the country is slipping back into near-deflation – a point that panicked headlines underscore.
But, contrary to the impression created by media reports, the Japanese economy is far from moribund.
Unemployment has virtually disappeared; the employment rate continues to reach new highs; and disposable income per capita is rising steadily.
In fact, even during Japan’s so-called “lost decades,” per capita income grew by as much as it did in the United States and Europe, and the employment rate rose, suggesting that deflation may not be quite as nefarious as central bankers seem to believe.
In the US and Europe, there is also little sign of an economic calamity resulting from central banks’ failure to reach their inflation targets.
Consumer prices are falling for a simple reason: energy and other raw material prices have declined by more than half in the last two years.
The decline is therefore temporary, and central banks should look past it, much as they looked past the increase in consumer prices when oil prices were surging.
Instead, central banks should focus on the rate of revenue increase, measured in nominal GDP growth; that is, after all, what matters for highly indebted governments and enterprises.
By this measure, there is no deflation: The GDP price index (called GDP deflator) in developed countries is increasing by 1-1.5%, on average.
This may fall short of the European Central Bank’s target of “below but close to 2%,” but not by a margin substantial enough to justify the ECB’s increasingly aggressive use of monetary instruments to stimulate the economy.
When, as is usually the case, the long-term interest rate is higher than the GDP growth rate, the wealthy may accumulate wealth faster than the rest of the economy – a point made by the economist Thomas Piketty.
But today, nominal GDP growth far exceeds average long-term interest rates (which, in some countries, include risk premia of up to 100 basis points) – even in the eurozone, where nominal GDP growth is expected to reach about 3% this year.
This means that financing conditions are as favorable as they were at the peak of the credit boom in 2007, and much better than they have been at any other point in the last 20 years.
One might expect this evidence to compel central bankers to rethink their current concerns about deflation.
But they remain committed to pursuing their inflation targets, convinced that even a slight bout of deflation could initiate a downward spiral, with falling demand causing prices to decline further.
Of course, a deflationary spiral is possible, and its consequences could be serious.
If real interest rates were significantly positive, demand could plummet, pushing down prices to the point that it becomes impossible for borrowers to service their debts.
Such a spiral contributed to the Great Depression in the US in the 1930s, with prices falling, in some years, by some 20-30%.
In fact, nominal interest rates are at zero, while the broadest price indices are increasing, albeit gently.
Given that financing conditions are so favorable, it is not surprising that domestic demand has remained robust, allowing unemployment to return to pre-crisis lows almost everywhere.
The eurozone is the only large developed economy where unemployment remains substantial, and thus the only economy where the case could be made for a downside risk of deflation.
But even in the eurozone, GDP growth is slightly above its (admittedly very meager) potential, so that the remaining output gap is being closed gradually.
Furthermore, the only reason why unemployment remains high in the eurozone is that the labor-force participation rate has continued to increase throughout the recession; and, indeed, employment is returning to pre-crisis levels.
The popular “discouraged worker” hypothesis holds that a slide into deflation is costly, because a long recession induces workers to leave the labor force altogether.
Developed-economy central banks should overcome their irrational fear of a deflationary spiral, and stop trying desperately to stimulate demand.
Otherwise, they will find themselves with massively expanded balance sheets, and very little to show for it.
It is said that political power in Pakistan flows from the three A’s: Allah, the Army, and support from America.
Of the three, it is the army leadership that has the clearest means of ridding the country of Pakistan’s president in uniform, Pervez Musharraf.
And that’s the main reason any power-sharing deal with former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto is unlikely to end Pakistan’s political turmoil.
Musharraf hoped to extend his presidency this fall without caving in to opposition demands that he renounce his military position and restore a civilian rival to the post of prime minister.
Since seizing power following a 1999 coup, Musharraf has survived at least three serious assassination attempts.
His anti-terrorist partnership with the United States fatally undermined his political alliance with Pakistan’s religious conservatives even before his government stormed Islamabad’s Red Mosque in July, killing more than 100 people.
Their anger, inflamed in March when he tried unsuccessfully to sack the Supreme Court’s independent-minded chief justice, rages on.
The court recently ruled that Nawaz Sharif, who Musharraf unseated eight years ago, must be allowed to return from exile.
His “decisive struggle against dictatorship” – and determined opposition to any deal with Bhutto that excludes him – will intensify.
Some in Washington charge that he has done too little to roust al-Qaeda and Taliban fighters from safe havens along the country’s border with Afghanistan.
His recent flirtation with a plan to bypass Bhutto and declare emergency rule provoked pointed Bush administration criticism.
But it’s the army that is most likely to eventually decide the fate of his presidency.
Musharraf’s rule has given the military leadership a strong role in policymaking, but his eight years in office have badly damaged domestic support for the army’s influence within the government.
Aware of a potential threat from within their ranks, Musharraf has populated his inner circle with relatively junior (and reliably loyal) officers.
But a deal that makes Bhutto prime minister would undermine the military’s influence – and eventually its support for Musharraf’s presidency.
As prime minister, she could eventually revisit her deal with Musharraf from a position of strength.
Military leaders know this, and the threat that they will eventually push him aside will plague his presidency well into next year.
The army is unlikely to move on Musharraf directly unless subtler methods fail.
The generals know that another coup would further weaken the military’s popular standing – as well as Pakistan’s relations with the US – at a moment when Bhutto and Sharif have raised expectations at home and abroad for a permanent return to civilian rule.
But if Musharraf were to refuse to go quietly, the generals could promise him a long list of public corruption charges that he must survive without their protection.
Musharraf’s presidency won’t survive long without military backing.
To preserve the appearance that their meddling is benign, senior military officers probably know that they cannot afford to install another general as president.
Instead, they will most likely support cosmetic political reforms, including a new law that formally separates the roles of army commander and head of state.
That is the strategy the military adopted in 1988, following the mysterious plane crash that killed former President (and General) Mohammed Zia ul-Haq.
The army leadership ordered elections, permitted the formation of a civilian government, and then stage-managed the political process from the wings.
Bhutto, the leader of a secular party that now enjoys substantial support in Washington, would dominate policy planning in the next government at Musharraf’s expense.
She must build on her domestic support, but she can rely on economic and security cooperation with America to safeguard the country’s stability.
In addition, the military’s role as guarantor of stability, and its tight control of Pakistan’s nuclear arsenal, the army’s crown jewels, will continue.
The Bush administration can therefore enthusiastically back a return to civilian rule and claim a much-needed victory for democracy in a Muslim country.
Sharif would fulminate against her every misstep, threats of attack from religious radicals would continue, and the military would safeguard its interests from just off stage.
Adding to the pressure, America would expect the kind of cooperation in pacifying Pakistan’s tribal areas that Musharraf has proven unable to provide.
The military will, under any scenario, continue to quell fears of complete political chaos.
But it would also likely ensure that a Musharraf-Bhutto deal does not fully close a tumultuous chapter in Pakistan’s history.
MUNICH – The motto of the United States of America is: “E pluribus unum” (Out of many, one).
The European Union’s motto is “In varietate concordia,” which is officially translated as “United in diversity.”
It is difficult to express the differences between the US and the European model any more clearly than this.
The US is a melting pot, whereas Europe is a mosaic of different peoples and cultures that has developed over the course of its long history.
That difference raises the question of whether it is worth striving for a United States of Europe – a concept that many refuse to accept, because they do not believe in the possibility of a unified European identity.
A single political system like that of the US, they insist, presupposes a common language and a single nationality.
Perhaps the idea of a United States of Europe, the dream of post-war children like me, can never be realized.
After all, deeper European integration and the creation of a single political system offer solid, practical advantages that do not require a common identity or language.
These advantages include the right to move freely across borders, the free movement of goods and services, legal certainty for cross-border economic activities, Europe-wide transportation infrastructure, and, not least, common security arrangements.
If banks are regulated at the national level, but do business internationally, national regulatory authorities have a permanent incentive to set lax standards to avoid driving business to other countries and to lure it from them instead.
Regulatory competition thus degenerates into a race to the bottom, since the benefits of lax regulation translate into profits at home, while the losses lie with bank creditors around the world.
There are many similar examples from the fields of standards, competition policy, and taxation that are applicable here.
So, fundamental considerations speak for deeper European integration, extending even to the creation of a single European state.
The danger of following such a path always lies in the fact that collective decision-making bodies not only provide services that are useful to everybody, but also may abuse their power to redistribute resources among the participating countries.
To counter this threat, democratic bodies invariably need special rules to protect minorities, such as the requirement of qualified majority voting or unanimous decision-making.
The decisions taken by the European Central Bank are a particularly dramatic example of this problem, taken as they are by a simple majority of a body that is not even democratically elected.
The ECB’s decisions lead to a massive redistribution of wealth and risk among the eurozone’s member states, as well as from stable countries’ taxpayers, who have little stake in the crisis, to global investors directly affected by it.
The ECB has been providing virtually all of its refinancing credit to the eurozone’s five crisis-stricken countries: Italy, Spain, Portugal, Greece, and Ireland.
All the money circulating in the eurozone originated in these five countries and was then largely used to buy goods and assets in the northern member countries and redeem foreign debt taken from them.
The US Federal Reserve would never be allowed to conduct such a regionally imbalanced policy.
The Fed cannot even provide credit to specific regions, let alone states on the verge of bankruptcy (for example, California).
And now European Council President Herman Van Rompuy, backed by most of the troubled eurozone countries, is again proposing Eurobonds and debt-mutualization schemes.
The kind of fiscal integration and centralized power that they would require do not even remotely resemble those in place in the US.
The path toward a union based on joint liabilities, against the wishes of large parts of its population, is not leading to a federal state in the true sense of the term – that is, to an alliance of equals, who freely decide to unite and promise to protect each other.
Nor can this path lead to a United States of Europe, simply because a large part of Europe refuses to follow it.
As useful as the euro could be for Europe’s prosperity if its obvious flaws were corrected, the way that the eurozone is now developing will split the EU and undermine the idea of unity in diversity.
The assertion that the eurozone could be transformed into a United States of Europe is no longer convincing.
The path toward joint liability is far more likely to lead to a deep rift within Europe, because turning the eurozone into a transfer and debt union that can prevent the insolvency of any of its members would require more central power than currently exists in the US.
CAMBRIDGE – “When men have realized that time has upset many fighting faiths,” US Supreme Court Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes wrote in a famous dissenting opinion in 1919, “they may come to believe…that the ultimate good desired is better reached by free trade in ideas – that the best test of truth is the power of the thought to get itself accepted in the competition of the market, and that truth is the only ground upon which their wishes safely can be carried out.”
Like any market, however, the marketplace of ideas needs regulation: in particular, its participants should be bound by norms of honesty, humility, and civility.
Of course, politicians through the ages have polluted the marketplace of ideas with invective.
According to a study by the Annenberg Public Policy Center, there has been less incivility in Congress in recent years than in the 1990’s or the 1940’s.
Republican Senator Ted Cruz was widely condemned for his aggressive questioning of incoming Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel back in January.
But casting aspersions on a nominee’s patriotism was the norm in the McCarthy era; it is less common today.
A “social science” like economics is supposed to be free of partisan vitriol.
Yet economists now routinely stoop to ad hominem attacks and inflammatory polemics.
As economists go, they do not come much mightier or more influential than Paul Krugman.
A Nobel laureate who teaches at Princeton University, Krugman is also a columnist for the New York Times, whose commentaries and blog, “The Conscience of a Liberal,” are read with an almost religious fervor by liberal (in the American sense) economists and journalists around the world.
A dozen ardent epigones blog in sync with him, re-posting the wisdom of the master.
Many people today naively believe that the Internet is an unmitigated boon for free speech.
They underestimate the extent to which such a concentration of online power corrupts, just as surely as all forms of power corrupt.
Since Krugman and I began debating fiscal and monetary policy back in 2009, I have become increasingly alarmed by the way he abuses his power.
Last week, I resolved to speak out in a three-article series, published squarely in the heart of the liberal blogosphere, the Huffington Post.
By quoting his past writings, I showed, first, that Krugman’s repeated claims to have been “right about everything” in his economic commentary are false.
Although (like many others) he identified a housing bubble in 2006, he did not foresee the financial chain reaction that would fuel a global crisis.
Having failed to predict the US crisis, he then incorrectly predicted the imminent disintegration of Europe’s monetary union, publishing more than 20 statements on that subject in 2011 and 2012.
He has never admitted these errors; on the contrary, he has retrospectively exaggerated his own prescience.
Second, Krugman’s claim that a vastly larger fiscal stimulus would have generated a more rapid economic recovery in the US depends entirely on conjecture.
But the macroeconomic model on which he bases his claim can hardly be called reliable, given its manifest failures to predict either the crisis or the euro’s survival.
Moreover, at least one of his pre-crisis columns flatly contradicts his view today that current – or even higher – levels of federal debt carry no risk whatsoever.
So he has no right to claim, as he has, “a stunning victory” in “an epic intellectual debate.”
Finally – and most important – even if Krugman had been “right about everything,” there would still be no justification for the numerous crude and often personal attacks he has made on those who disagree with him.
Words like “cockroach,” “delusional,” “derp,” “dope,” “fool,” “knave,” “mendacious idiot,” and “zombie” have no place in civilized debate.
I consider myself lucky that he has called me only a “poseur,” a “whiner,” “inane” – and, last week, a “troll.”
Far from engaging in Holmes’s free trade in ideas, Krugman has been the intellectual equivalent of a robber baron, exploiting his power to the point of driving decent people away from the public sphere – particularly younger scholars, who understandably dread a “takedown” by the “Invincible Krugtron.”
But I have given up hope that the New York Times will perform its proper editorial function.
For every word that Krugman publishes, he must henceforth commit to having first read at least a hundred words by other writers.
I cannot guarantee that reading more widely will teach him honesty, humility, and civility.
But it will at least reduce his unjustifiably large share of the marketplace of economic ideas.
But his arguments in this area failed his own “test of truth,” for they lacked “the power…to get…accepted in the competition of the market.”
It is high time that Krugman – right or wrong – learned to behave that way, too.
NEW DELHI – With every new crisis that the world faces, humanity’s differences appear increasingly intractable.
Religion, ethnicity, history, politics, and economics have all become tools to denigrate and demean.
People seem to be drifting apart, and no country is immune from divisive discourse.
But there is one fundamental issue where contrasts dissolve into consensus: the desire to keep children safe.
Protecting the physical, emotional, and psychological wellbeing of children is a universal instinct that no faith, dogma, or ideology can defeat.
And yet, despite this shared instinct, children everywhere continue to be preyed upon.
Too often, societies ignore child sexual abuse, owing to family pride or fear of stigma.
According to a 2016 World Health Organization report, one of every four adults was sexually abused as a child.
A 2007 Indian government study found that 53% of children in India faced some form of sexual abuse growing up.
And human trafficking, especially trafficking of children, is a booming business, with annual average profits totaling $150 billion.
In other words, child sexual abuse is a moral epidemic afflicting the entire world –one that we can defeat only when we openly declare open against it.
Young victims and their families should not have to live in silence while predators roam fearless and free.
That is why, in December 2016, I joined a diverse group of Nobel laureates and global leaders to launch the “100 Million for 100 Million”campaign.
One of the campaign’s objectives is to persuade, provoke, and inspire 100 million young people around the world to raise their voices against violence inflicted on children.
The response so far has been overwhelming; tens of thousands have taken the pledge to defend the defenseless.
But I believe we must do even more to awaken the world’s slumbering consciousness on this evil.
So on September 11, I will embark on a bharat yatra (political pilgrimage), traveling across India to declare war on sexual abuse and exploitation of children everywhere.
Together with dedicated campaigners and child-rights advocates, I will travel from Kanyakumari, on India’s southern tip, to India’s capital, Delhi.
More than ten million people are expected to join me physically and virtually on a march that will traverse 11,000 kilometers (6,835 miles), touching all corners of India in a bid to raise global awareness.
Cynics might say that marches cannot change engrained social taboos.
I have seen first-hand how change is possible when ordinary people speak out.
In 1998, I accompanied a group of young people from around the world to the headquarters of the International Labor Organization (ILO) in Geneva.
One by one, these brave children told the assembled leaders of their chained lives as forced laborers.
It was the culmination of the Global March Against Child Labor, and more than 15 million people had joined us by marching some 80,000 kilometers through 103 countries.
Within a year, the ILO passed Convention 182, which banned the worst forms of child labor.
Today, 181 countries have ratified the convention and passed domestic laws that ban the practice.
Back in 1998, when we launched the global march – amid similar cynicism and apathy – roughly 250 million children were being forced to work in horrific conditions.
Though much remains to be done, that number has since dropped by about a third, and I am confident we can reach zero within a generation.
In 2001, our shiksha yatra (march for education) called on government officials to make access to school a fundamental right for all children.
Today, that right is enshrined in the Indian Constitution, and primary school enrollment is almost universal.
As many as two million children are victims of trafficking every year, with many sold into the sex trade.
In 2016, a record number of people – more than 65 million – were forced from their homes by civil war and other unrest.
When children are displaced, they become highly vulnerable to trafficking and sexual abuse, underscoring the need to act decisively.
When we begin marching this month, we will do so as non-violent soldiers in a global war.
Our goal is to give voice to ordinary victims who have been silenced by fear and social pressure.
We aim to tug at the conscience of people everywhere, to provoke others into action.
Mahatma Gandhi galvanized millions of oppressed people through his marches.
Let us be inspired by them, and wage a humanitarian war against child sexual abuse.
Today, 26 NATO Heads of State and Government will meet at NATO Headquarters in Brussels.
They are here to demonstrate a strong spirit of unity in the transatlantic community, a determination to look forward and take action together.
There are important questions to be addressed, not only about the direction of NATO’s missions and operations, but also about the future of transatlantic security cooperation and the role the Alliance will play.
The broad range of issues to be discussed mirrors the essential place of the Alliance in addressing today’s security challenges.
They will discuss how to reinforce the success the international community has had in helping to build a new, democratic Afghanistan.
NATO and its members are already providing the essential security Afghanistan needs in order to make its aspirations for self-sustaining peace and prosperity a reality.
Today, NATO leaders will reaffirm their commitment to the courageous people of this country: we will help them for as long as it takes.
All 26 NATO nations are now, as an Alliance, working together to respond to the Iraqi government’s request for support: by training Iraqi security forces, by providing equipment, or by helping to fund NATO’s efforts.
Already, the Alliance is developing a deeper political dialogue and more practical cooperation with the countries of North Africa, Israel and Jordan, and opening up a discussion with the Gulf States.
When Dr. Rice made her first visit as Secretary of State to NATO headquarters two weeks ago, Alliance Foreign Ministers had a discussion about the Middle East Peace Process.
The broader Middle East will be on the agenda of Heads and State and Government again today.
Many other critical political issues will be addressed: from ensuring stability in Kosovo as the political situation evolves this year; to the importance of maintaining strong relations and a frank dialogue with Russia; to building a stronger relationship with the EU, one that maximises the complementarity between our two organisations; to supporting the new government in Ukraine as it finds its path.
In that regard, this morning NATO leaders will welcome their first meeting with President Yushchenko.
They will share with him their common determination to help him build a better, more democratic future for his people, and strengthen Ukraine’s Euro-Atlantic integration.
But NATO leaders will also lift their eyes from the immediate challenges of the day, and discuss a fundamental strategic question as well: how to use NATO to its fullest potential as a platform for holding political discussions and building transatlantic consensus across the wide range of the issues where Europe and North America share common interests and wish to defend common values.
NATO is the only permanent political forum in which North America sits together with Europe.
This is a unique framework for profound transatlantic political consultation and effective military cooperation.
The Alliance can and should be the place to discuss and debate a broader range of political issues.
Indeed, as we face today’s security challenges - terrorism, proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, failed states - we cannot afford not to.
I am encouraged that, more and more, Alliance leaders are coming to share the same view.
Today’s Summit meeting will give a new impulse to NATO’s political evolution.
That evolution will accelerate in the coming months and years, as NATO’s strengthens its role in shaping and delivering transatlantic security cooperation in the 21st century.
CAMBRIDGE – Some analysts believe that 2014 ushered in a new era of Cold War-style geopolitics.
Russian President Vladimir Putin’s invasion of Ukraine and annexation of Crimea was met with heavy economic sanctions from Europe and the United States, weakening Russia’s ties with the West and leaving the Kremlin eager to strengthen ties with China.
The question is whether Russia will manage to build a real alliance with the People’s Republic.
Indeed, traditional balance-of-power theory suggests that US primacy in power resources should be offset by a Sino-Russian partnership.
In the 1950s, China and the Soviet Union were allied against the US.
After US President Richard Nixon’s opening to China in l972, the balance shifted, with the US and China cooperating to limit what they viewed as a dangerous rise in the Soviet Union’s power.
With the collapse of the Soviet Union, that de facto US-China alliance ended, and a China-Russia rapprochement began.
In 1992, the two countries declared that they were pursuing a “constructive partnership”; in 1996, they progressed toward a “strategic partnership”; and in 2001, they signed a treaty of “friendship and cooperation.”
In recent years, China and Russia have cooperated closely in the UN Security Council and taken similar positions on Internet regulation.
They have used diplomatic frameworks – such as the BRICS group of major emerging countries (along with Brazil, India, and South Africa) and the Shanghai Cooperation Organization (along with Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan) – to coordinate positions.
And Putin has struck up a good working relationship with Chinese President Xi Jinping, based on their shared domestic illiberalism and desire to counter American ideology and influence.
Last May, shortly after the annexation of Crimea, Russia announced a $400 billion deal to supply 38 billion cubic meters (bcm) of gas to China annually for 30 years, beginning in 2019.
The contract, between Russia’s state-owned energy giant Gazprom and the China National Petroleum Corporation, entails the construction of a 2,500-mile gas pipeline to China’s Heilongjiang province (where, incidentally, the two countries nearly went to war a few decades ago).
Though the exact price remains secret, it appears that Russia offered major concessions, after nearly a decade of negotiations, to ensure the deal’s success.
Moreover, in November, Gazprom announced a framework agreement to deliver an additional 30 bcm of gas to China’s Xingjiang Province from western Siberia for 30 years via another new pipeline.
If the “eastern” and “western” pipelines are completed as planned, the 68 bcm they deliver to China annually would dwarf the 40 bcm that Russia exports to its current largest customer, Germany.
But there is a hitch: the gas deals amplify a significant bilateral trade imbalance, with Russia supplying raw materials to China and importing Chinese manufactures.
And the gas deals do not make up for Russia’s lost access to the Western technology that it needs to develop frontier Arctic fields and become an energy superpower, not just China’s gas station.
In fact, the problems with a Sino-Russian alliance run even deeper.
With its economic, military, and demographic heft – China generates considerable unease in Russia.
Consider the demographic situation in eastern Siberia, where six million Russians live across the border from up to 120 million Chinese.
Furthermore, Russia’s economic and military power has been in decline, whereas China’s has exploded.
Anxiety over China’s conventional military superiority probably motivated, at least partly, Russia’s 2009 announcement of a new military doctrine explicitly reserving the right to first use of nuclear weapons – a stance that resembles America’s Cold War force posture, aimed at deterring superior conventional Soviet forces in Europe.
These imbalances suggest that Russia would resist a tight military alliance with China, even as the two countries pursue mutually beneficial tactical diplomatic coordination.
After all, China’s development strategy depends on its continued integration into the world economy – and, specifically, reliable access to American markets and technology.
The Chinese Communist Party’s legitimacy depends on strong economic growth, and it will not risk this strategy for some “authoritarian alliance” with Russia.
Even within multilateral forums, the relationship between Russia and China is far from balanced.
Given that China’s economy is larger than the other four BRICS economies combined, the group’s initiatives – including its new development bank – are likely to reflect a disproportionate Chinese influence.
And though the Shanghai Cooperation Organization has facilitated some diplomatic coordination, China and Russia remain locked in a struggle for influence in Central Asia.
The Sino-Russian alliance in the twentieth century was a product of China’s weakness following World War II and at the beginning of the Cold War – and, even then, it lasted little more than a decade.
Today’s China is strong, and unlikely to get too close to a Russia whose decline has been accelerated by its leader’s poor judgment.
In short, when it comes to a Sino-Russian alliance challenging the West, history is not likely to repeat itself.
Contrary to Putin’s hopes, 2014 will not be remembered as a year of successful Russian foreign policy.
Last week's brutal bombing in Madrid is part of a wave of terror that has made victims of Christians as well as Muslims.
Everywhere debate is focused on the best way to combat this form of terrorism and on the importance, in this context, of the Greater Middle East initiative that the United States wants the G8 and NATO to approve in June.
Unlike European leaders such as Joschka Fischer, Germany's Foreign Minister, the US excludes the Israeli-Arab conflict from the initiative, and wants to concentrate solely on the social and economic problems that feed extremism and terrorism in the Islamic world.
Concern with the region did not begin with the attacks in the US in September 2001 or with the Madrid bombings.
Already in the 1980's and 1990's, Europe had launched the "Barcelona Process" to promote democracy, security and development in the region.
Then, as now, fears about regional instability, economic stagnation, and social backwardness abounded.
There were anxieties, too, that the increasing loss of legitimacy of Arab nationalist regimes would benefit radical Islamists - fears confirmed by Algeria's bloody civil war of the 1990's.
But if defending the status quo no longer seems possible, regime change incites its own fears.
This led some to support the Algerian government's military crackdown after Islamists won the first round of 1991 legislative elections.
But the stubborn inertia of authoritarian regimes only encourages radicalization, so there is a clear need for a gradual process of liberalization.
This dilemma underscores the difficulty in crafting a democratization strategy for so vast a region as "the Greater Middle East," which stretches from Mauritania to Pakistan.
After all, any such strategy must, by definition, ignore local specificities and regional realities.
What is needed instead are policies that reflect particular circumstances in different states and regions, together with an awareness that democracy is, above all, a statement about national realities and depends primarily on domestic factors.
If imposing a single strategy is unviable, what should the European option be, and what policy should the G8 and NATO adopt?
Each positive initiative, whether it comes from governments or civil societies, should be supported.
The historical parallel here is not, as is often suggested, with the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe, but with the Marshall Plan, which provided real incentives, not lofty rhetoric and hortatory appeals, for integration and democratic consolidation.
The fight against terrorism, which requires short-term successes, must be differentiated from the long-term process of reform.
The priority in fighting terrorism should be police and intelligence service cooperation, which produces much faster results and limits the capacity of extremists to mobilize.
Human rights cannot be defended if antiterrorism activities fail to respect the rule of law.
Nor can democracy be advanced if authoritarian regimes are supported simultaneously merely because - like Saddam Hussein's Iraq - they are secular and anti-Islamist.
Initiatives such as the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership and the European Neighborhood Policy need sustained political engagement and resources if they are to work.
NATO's attempt to change public perceptions of its objectives and operations is also in effect a long-term effort.
Larger projects, such as the Greater Middle East initiative, are much less sustainable than targeted initiatives and are more susceptible to the exigencies of electoral campaigns.
It must contribute in its own unique way to resolving conflicts that hinder inclusion and feed radicalism.
The main US focus must be on finding a fair solution to the Israeli-Palestinian question and to the Iraq crisis.
Because NATO and the EU share complementary priorities, both can develop mechanisms for inclusive security cooperation in peacekeeping operations.
Its diversity must be recognized, so that groups that resort to violence can be differentiated from those that do not.
There can be no democratic transition if Islamic currents that reject violence and accept democracy's ground rules are not integrated into the public arena.
A key factor in the success of any EU Middle East initiative will be the millions of European citizens of North African origin, who have a political, cultural, and economic role to play.
That is why the current French debate on the headscarf is so important, for it concerns the rights of Muslim women in European societies and the protection of diversity.
Indeed, the main lesson of recent years is that their own security requires that they support democratic openings elsewhere.
PARIS – The United States is widely recognized as possessing the deepest, most liquid, and most efficient capital markets in the world.
America’s financial system supports efficient capital allocation, economic development, and job creation.
These and similar phrases have been common currency among American legislators, regulators, and financial firms for decades.
Even in the wake of the financial crisis that erupted in 2008, they trip off the word processors of a hundred submissions challenging the so-called Volcker rule (which would bar banks from making proprietary investments).
Prior to the crisis, regulatory authorities focused mainly on removing barriers to trading, and generally favored measures that made markets more complete by fostering faster, cheaper trading of a wider variety of financial claims.
On the contrary, nowadays many are questioning the assumption that greater market efficiency is always and everywhere a public good.
Might such ease and efficiency not also fuel market instability, and serve the interests of intermediaries rather than their clients?
Phrases like “sand in the machine” and “grit in the oyster,” which were pejorative in the prelapsarian days of 2006, are now used to support regulatory or fiscal changes that may slow down trading and reduce its volume.
For example, the proposed Financial Transactions Tax in the European Union implies a wide-ranging impost generating more than €50 billion a year to shore up the EU’s own finances and save the euro.
The fact that 60-70% of the receipts would come from London is an added attraction for its continental advocates.
Opponents argue, in pre-crisis language, that the FTT would reduce market efficiency and displace trading to other locations.
“So what?” supporters reply: maybe much of the trading is “socially useless,” and we would be better off without it.
The Volcker rule (named for former Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker) provoked similar arguments.
Critics have complained that it would reduce liquidity in important markets, such as those for non-US sovereign debt.
Defending his creation, Volcker harks back to a simpler time for the financial system, and refers to “overly liquid, speculation-prone securities markets.”
In a penetrating analysis of the “Flash Crash” of May 6, 2010, when the Dow lost $1 trillion of market value in 30 minutes, Andy Haldane of the Bank of England argues that while rising equity-market capitalization might well be associated with financial development and economic growth, there is no such relationship between market turnover and growth.
Turnover in US financial markets rose four-fold in the decade before the crisis.
Haldane cites a striking statistic: in 1945, the average investor held the average US share for four years.
By 2000, the average holding period had fallen to eight months; by 2008, it was two months.
There appears to be a link between this precipitous drop in the average duration of stock holdings and the phenomenon of the so-called “ownerless corporation,” whereby shareholders have little incentive to impose discipline on management.
That absence of accountability, in turn, has contributed to the vertiginous rise in senior executives’ compensation and, in financial firms, to a shift away from shareholder returns and towards large payouts to insiders.
But Haldane’s main concern is with the stability of markets, particularly the threats posed by high-frequency trading (HFT).
He points out that HFT already accounts for half of total turnover in some debt and foreign-exchange markets, and that it is dominant in US equity markets, accounting for more than one-third of daily trading, up from less than one-fifth in 2005.
It is only a decade since trading speeds fell below one second; they are now as fast as the blink of an eye.
Indeed, HFT firms talk of a “race to zero,” the point at which trading takes place at close to the speed of light.
Will light-speed trading deliver us to free-market Nirvana?
It would seem that bid-offer spreads are falling, which we might regard as positive.
As for liquidity, while on the surface it looks deeper, the joint report on the Flash Crash prepared by the US Securities and Exchange Commission and the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission shows that HFT traders scaled back liquidity sharply, thereby exacerbating the problem.
The liquidity that they apparently offer proved unreliable under stress – that is, when it is most needed.
First, their monitoring of markets requires a quantum leap in sophistication and speed.
There is a case, too, for looking again at the operation of circuit-breakers (which helped the Chicago markets in the crash), and for increasing the obligations on market makers.
Such steps must be carefully calibrated, as greater obligations, for example, could push market makers out of the market.
But Haldane’s conclusion is that, overall, markets are less stable as a result of the sharp rise in turnover, and that “grit in the wheels, like grit on the roads, could help forestall the next crash.”
So the traditional defense of US and, indeed, European capital markets is not as axiomatic as it once seemed.
Market participants need to engage more effectively with the new agenda, and not assume that claims of greater “market efficiency” will win the day.
Without more sophisticated arguments, they might well find themselves submerged under a pile of regulatory sandbags.
The world’s first wave of economic globalization, led by the British Empire in the nineteenth century, came to an end literally with a bang on a Sunday afternoon in 1914, when Gavrilo Princip killed (with two uncannily well-aimed bullets) Austria’s Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife.
The years that followed witnessed pan-European carnage, instability throughout the 1920’s, and the rise of fascism and communism, culminating in the death of countless millions during World War II.
If so, it may not necessarily end with a repeat of the slaughters of the last century, but with an economic retrenchment that brings economic stagnation and consigns billions of people to grinding poverty.
But one little noticed, yet likely, aspirant has been sneaking up on the world economy: the growing tendency to limit the free circulation of people, to “fence in” the rich world.
We see the menace of this tendency constantly nowadays, but we perceive it in such a seemingly unthreatening way that we may well become accustomed to it rather than arresting it.
Globalization means free movement of capital, goods, technology, ideas, and, yes, people.
Any globalization that is limited to the first three or four freedoms but omits the last one is partial and not sustainable.
As soon as people cannot move, there will be little to stop governments from limiting the free movement of goods or other factors of production.
After all, if over-populated countries with high unemployment cannot export people, why not reach for higher tariff barriers to protect the jobs they have?
The war on terror has shown us the dangers that can arise from the social frustrations that often result.
Nevertheless, the “fencing-in” of the rich world continues apace.
The United States plans to construct a veritable “Mexican Wall” to keep poor people from crossing into Texas or California.
Likewise, hundreds, if not thousands, of Africans die every year trying to reach the shores of Fortress Europe.
Efforts to restrict people’s movement between countries expose the soft underbelly of globalization: the deepening gap between countries’ mean incomes.
Rather than poor countries growing faster than the rich (as we would expect from Economics 101), mainly the reverse is true.
Between 1980 and 2002, average annual per capita income growth in the rich world (defined as the “old” OECD members) was almost 2%, compared to just 0.1% in the 42 least developed countries.
People nowadays know much more about conditions in different countries than they did in the past, and if moving across a border means that their income can be multiplied several-fold, they will try to do it.
This is why today’s most contentious borders separate economies where the income gaps between people on the two sides are the greatest.
There are four such global hot spots: the borders between the US and Mexico, Spain and Morocco, Greece (and Italy) and the southern Balkans, and Indonesia and Singapore (or Malaysia).
The income gaps range from more than seven to one in the latter case to 4.5 to one in the case of Spain and Morocco, 4.3 to one between the US and Mexico, and four to one between Greece and Albania.
In 1980, average income in the US was a little more than three times that of Mexico, the gap between Singapore and Indonesia was 5.3 to one, and the difference between Spain and Morocco 3.5 to one.
Even the gap between Greece and Albania, at three to one, was narrower than it is now.
So income gaps between all these contiguous countries have increased significantly during the last quarter-century.
So it is little wonder that it is in these places that most illegal immigration and human trafficking occurs – pirates in the Straits of Malacca, fast boats between Albania and Italy, and desperate human cargoes from Africa and Latin America.
If today’s globalization continues to widen income gaps, the waves of migration will grow.
So the rich world will, in a knee-jerk response, erect ever-higher barriers to stem the human tide.
If globalization, which has so enriched the world’s wealthiest countries, is to continue, governments must find ways to increase incomes more evenly.
Otherwise, today’s “fencing in” of the rich world will increase the risk of a backlash against free circulation of goods and capital, as well as of political instability punctuated by terrorism.
Global income redistribution by the rich countries should be viewed as a matter not of charity, but of enlightened self-interest.
LONDON – The G-8 recently asked the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, which was created to support the post-communist transitions to democracy and market economies in Central and Eastern Europe, to put its experience to use in Egypt.
But which lessons from the Eastern European transition experience are relevant for countries in North Africa and the Middle East?
An important difference is that, unlike Eastern Europe in 1989, the countries of the “Arab Spring” do not have centrally planned economies.
While the state is involved in much economic activity and property rights are frequently contested, private property is nevertheless firmly established.
There may be impediments to international trade, but nothing like in Eastern Europe, which largely traded with itself in distorted and artificial ways.
So it is in the countries of the Eastern Europe of today – and the two decades of reform experiences that have brought them to where they are – that we should seek parallels with North Africa.
Despite the financial crisis, political and economic progress in Central Europe and the Baltic countries has been remarkable.
On the other hand, most countries in the former Soviet Union are like much of North Africa and the Middle East – “stuck in transit.”
Some, like Belarus and Uzbekistan, have not even started reforms in earnest.
The richness of Eastern European transition experience offers valuable clues about how to break out of being “stuck in transit.”
The emotional debates over “shock therapy” vs. gradualism have been replaced by a broad consensus that, while we need to exploit windows of political opportunity, not everything can be done at once, and reversal is always a threat.
By starting with more visible and popular reforms in the short term, policymakers can build constituencies for tougher reforms later.
Key constituencies for political and economic reform in Central and Eastern Europe have been private small and medium-size firms and younger age cohorts.
Developing private sectors with meaningful jobs is even more important in countries like Egypt, which have much younger and rapidly growing populations.
Early calls in many countries to dismantle the state have given way to more sophisticated assessments.
A strong state is needed to support nascent markets and enforce laws and regulation, and it must invest in productivity-enhancing education and health care.
Another lesson is that we should not worry too much about shifting political majorities.
In fact, the ability of voters to remove incumbent governments has proven to be a strength, not a weakness.
The Polish government that launched the initial “shock therapy” reforms was replaced by a coalition with a “gradualist” bent and greater concern for distributional outcomes.
In the end, the country has built a thriving economy and a well-established democracy capable of dealing with calamities such as the global financial crisis and the tragic death of the country’s president last year.
Fear of reversals should not be used to bypass parliaments and civil society.
Important constitutional reforms and normal parliamentary processes were suspended in Russia in the early 1990’s, owing to fear of a Soviet revival.
While this prospect seemed real enough at the time, we now know that such an outcome was highly unlikely, given the economic and political bankruptcy of the system.
Today, poorly thought-out reforms in North Africa and the Middle East are being rushed through under the perceived threat of Islamist extremism.
But even when such fears are well-founded, reforms should be evaluated on their own merits in broad consultations.
In Central Europe and the Baltics, the promise of EU accession offered a path through the transition.
As for most of the countries of the former Soviet Union, which remain stuck in transit, EU membership is not in the cards for North Africa and the Middle East.
Even so, these countries’ geographic proximity to Europe enhances the benefits from trade and financial integration.
Conditional on reforms, Europe must open its market to both its southern and eastern neighbors.
As a young boy in Sierra Leone, years that should have been playful and carefree were spent fighting in someone else’s war.
But when the war officially ended, in 2002, I began finding ways to recover.
One of the most important has been an opportunity I couldn’t have imagined as an angry, illiterate, nine-year-old soldier: school.
Thanks to hard work and lots of good fortune, I managed to graduate from high school and then university.
Now, in just a few months, I will begin graduate classes at the Fordham University School of Law, an unimaginable destination for most of the former child soldiers in my country.
And yet, throughout my brief educational journey, one question has always nagged me: why did luck play such a crucial role?
Today, more than 260 million children are out of school, and over 500 million boys and girls who do attend are not receiving a quality education, as the International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity discovered.
By 2030, more than half of the world’s school-age children – some 800 million kids – will lack the basic skills needed to thrive or secure a job in the workplace of the future.
But while education may be the best investment a government can make to ensure a better future for its people, education financing worldwide is far too low.
In fact, education accounts for just 10% of total international development aid, down from 13% a decade ago.
To put this in perspective, developing countries receive just $10 per child annually in global education support, barely enough to cover the cost of a single textbook.
In an age of self-driving cars and smart refrigerators, this dearth of funding is simply unacceptable.
Over the past few years, I have advocated on behalf of three global education initiatives – the International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity (Education Commission), the Global Partnership for Education (GPE), and the Education Cannot Wait fund (ECW).
I have done so eagerly, because these organizations are working collectively toward the same goal: to raise funds to make quality education for every child, everywhere, more than a matter of luck.
One of the best ways to do this is by supporting the International Finance Facility for Education, an initiative spearheaded by the Education Commission that could unlock the greatest global investment in education ever recorded.
Earlier this month, Global Youth Ambassadors, representing their peers in nearly 80 countries, presented a petition signed by more than 1.5 million children to United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres calling for the UN to support the finance facility.
By leveraging roughly $2 billion in donor guarantees, the finance facility aims to make $10 billion in grant and concessional funding available to countries that need it most.
If adopted widely, the program could make it possible for developing countries to provide quality education to millions more children, including refugees, young girls, and former child soldiers like me.
The International Finance Facility for Education – which is already backed by the World Bank, regional development banks, GPE, ECW, and numerous UN agencies – is among the best ways to make that happen.
Today, thanks to hard work, global support, and much good fortune, my future is brighter than it has ever been.
To ensure that others can gain a quality education and follow the path that has opened up to me, we must remove luck from the equation.
MILAN – The global economy is settling into a slow-growth rut, steered there by policymakers’ inability or unwillingness to address major impediments at a global level.
The question is whether an honest assessment of the impediments to economic performance worldwide will spur policymakers into action.
Since 2008, real (inflation-adjusted) cumulative growth in the developed economies has amounted to a mere 5-6%.
While China’s GDP has risen by about 70%, making it the largest contributor to global growth, this was aided substantially by debt-fueled investment.
And, indeed, as that stimulus wanes, the impact of inadequate advanced-country demand on Chinese growth is becoming increasingly apparent.
Leverage is increasing, with some $57 trillion having piled up worldwide since the global financial crisis began.
And that leverage – much of it the result of monetary expansion in most of the world’s advanced economies – is not even serving the goal of boosting long-term aggregate demand.
After all, accommodative monetary policies can, at best, merely buy time for more durable sources of demand to emerge.
Moreover, a protracted period of low interest rates has pushed up asset prices, causing them to diverge from underlying economic performance.
But while interest rates are likely to remain low, their impact on asset prices probably will not persist.
As a result, returns on assets are likely to decline compared to the recent past; with prices already widely believed to be in bubble territory, a downward correction seems likely.
Whatever positive impact wealth effects have had on consumption and deleveraging cannot be expected to continue.
The world also faces a serious investment problem, which the low cost of capital has done virtually nothing to overcome.
Public-sector investment is now below the level needed to sustain robust growth, owing to its insufficient contribution to aggregate demand and productivity gains.
And, indeed, debt and unfunded non-debt liabilities increasingly weigh down public-sector balance sheets and pension funds, eroding the foundations of resilient, sustainable growth.
But if the best way to reduce sovereign over-indebtedness is to achieve higher nominal GDP growth (the combination of real growth and inflation), cutting investment – a key ingredient in a pro-growth-strategy – is not a sound approach.
Instead, budget rules should segregate public investment, thereby facilitating a differential response in fiscal consolidation.
Increased public-sector investment could help to spur private-sector investment, which is also severely depressed.
In the United States, investment barely exceeds pre-crisis levels, even though GDP has risen by 10%.
Clearly, deficient aggregate demand has played a role by reducing the incentive to expand capacity.
Similarly, regulatory opacity – and, more broadly, uncertainty about the direction of economic policy – has discouraged investment.
And certain types of shareholder activism have bred short-termism on the part of firms.
Large pools of savings in sovereign wealth funds, pension funds, and insurance companies could be used, for example, to meet emerging economies’ huge financing needs for infrastructure and urbanization.
But the channels for such investment – which could go a long way toward boosting global growth – are clogged.
Meanwhile, technological and market forces have contributed to job polarization, with the middle-income bracket gradually deteriorating.
Automation, for example, seems to have spurred an unexpectedly rapid decline in routine white- and blue-collar jobs.
This has resulted in stagnating median incomes and rising income inequality, both of which constrain the private-consumption component of aggregate demand.
Even the one factor that has effectively increased disposable incomes and augmented demand – sharply declining commodity prices, particularly for fossil fuels – is ultimately problematic.
Indeed, for commodity-exporting countries, the fall in prices is generating fiscal and economic headwinds of varying intensity.
If this turns to full-blown deflation, accompanied by uncontrolled rising real interest rates, the risk to growth would be serious.
Even very low inflation hampers countries’ ability to address over-indebtedness.
And there is little sign of inflationary pressure, even in the US, which is near “full” employment.
Given such large demand shortfalls and output gaps, it should surprise no one that even exceptionally generous monetary conditions have proved insufficient to bolster inflation.
With few options for fighting deflation, countries have resorted to competitive devaluations.
But this is not an effective strategy for capturing a larger share of tradable global demand if everyone is doing it.
And targeting exchange-rate competitiveness doesn’t address the aggregate demand problem.
If the global economy remains on its current trajectory, a period of intense volatility could destabilize a number of emerging economies, while undermining development efforts worldwide.
For starters, governments must recognize that central banks, however well they have served their economies, cannot go it alone.
Complementary reforms are needed to maintain and improve the transmission channels of monetary policy and avoid adverse side effects.
In several countries – such as France, Italy, and Spain – reforms designed to increase structural flexibility are also crucial.
Furthermore, impediments to higher and more efficient public- and private-sector investment must be removed.
And governments must implement measures to redistribute income, improve the provision of basic services, and equip the labor force to take advantage of ongoing shifts in the economic structure.
Generating the political will to get even some of this done will be no easy feat.
But an honest look at the sorry state – and unpromising trajectory – of the global economy will, one hopes, help policymakers do what’s needed.
Many advanced countries are attempting to revive sustainable growth in the face of a decelerating global economy.
In particular, the tradable and non-tradable parts of a range of economies differ in important ways.
In the non-tradable sector (60-70% of the economy in advanced countries), the main growth inhibitors are weak demand, as in the United States following the financial crisis, and structural and competitive impediments to productivity, as in Japan.
In the tradable sector, growth depends on a country’s productivity relative to incomes and competitiveness.
At the global level, there can also be a shortage of aggregate demand on the tradable side.
The Nobel laureate economist Robert Solow has shown that growth comes from three sources: the working population, capital investment, and technological progress.
A growing young population helps to maintain fiscal balance and ensure intergenerational equity, but it does not by itself increase incomes.
On the other hand, economic growth below the sum of growth in the working population and the labor-saving part of technological change fuels unemployment.
Developing countries, once they enter rapid-growth mode, generate growth from capital deepening via investment, in a sense making up for past underinvestment.
And it is possible for advanced countries to fall behind by under-investing, particularly in the public sector, relying instead on less sustainable debt-fueled means of generating demand.
But, as Solow noted, investment has its limits, owing to diminishing marginal returns.
Often, these limits are not binding, but, once capital deepening is exhausted, technological progress, which makes inputs more productive in creating final value, is the long-run driver of growth.
The challenge is to apply these insights in a world characterized by global economic interdependence, major imbalances, and a worsening growth and employment problem.
It is a world in which economies are connected directly in the tradable sector of the global economy, and indirectly through the demand and employment linkages between the tradable and non-tradable sectors of individual economies.
In the short run, the non-tradable sector is, by definition, subject to domestic-demand constraints.
A shortfall in non-tradable demand inevitably limits growth on that side of the economy.
Government can, of course, bridge the gap via deficit spending (preferably focused on employment-generating investment that enhances future growth).
But the advanced countries are, to varying degrees, fiscally constrained by relatively high and rising public debt, largely owing to fiscal imbalances that were hidden from view until defective growth models broke down in the crisis of 2008.
Italy and Spain are clearly constrained by the absence of private capital in their respective sovereign-debt markets, with rising yields threatening their fiscal stability and reform programs.
They need the eurozone core and the International Monetary Fund as temporary lenders of last resort until they restore policy credibility and regain investors’ confidence.
The US sovereign-debt market shows no similar evidence of having reached a limit yet.
But bond markets do not issue many early warning signals: witness the sudden run-up of yields in Italy and Spain a year ago.
The more complex growth issues have to do with the tradable part of the global economy, where global aggregate demand – and the derived demand that lands in various places in global supply or value-added chains – is the target of competition.
Given the growth patterns across advanced and developing countries prior to the crisis, and then the large negative shock, it is likely that there is a shortfall of tradable global aggregate demand, impeding an important component of global growth.
But, for individual economies, relative productivity versus income levels determines the share of global tradable aggregate demand that is accessible.
Unlike the non-tradable side of the economy, the domestic component of global tradable demand is not an absolute constraint on growth; nor is the rate of growth of global tradable demand an absolute constraint, given the possibility of increasing share.
Fortunately, if countries increase productivity with the aim of boosting relative productivity and growth potential on the tradable side, this will increase incomes and accelerate the growth of global aggregate demand.
When incomes get significantly out of line with productivity levels (as they have recently), reviving growth requires resetting the terms of trade, which can be done with exchange rates, whether managed or set by markets.
In the eurozone, where countries with competitiveness problems do not have the exchange-rate adjustment mechanism, restrained income growth and productivity-boosting reforms are probably needed, as was the case in Germany between 2000 and 2006, and now in several southern European countries.
What is true for countries on the tradable side is also true for workers, who are differentially affected by the evolution of global supply chains.
The efficient integration of global supply chains has created employment opportunities in developing countries and in the higher value-added sectors of advanced countries.
But it has also reduced employment options for a subset of middle-income people in the tradable sectors of advanced economies.
Many countries are struggling to adapt their growth patterns to the new challenges they face in a slowing global economy.
To be effective and properly targeted, policies need to include an accurate diagnosis of growth potential and impediments in both the tradable and non-tradable parts of the economy.
Focusing on one (say, the competitiveness problem in the tradable sector) to the exclusion of the other (perhaps a serious non-tradable demand shortfall or stagnant absolute productivity) will not be enough.
NEW YORK – In recent years, the United States has been more a source of global instability than a source of global problem-solving.
Examples include the war in Iraq, launched by the US on false premises, obstructionism on efforts to curb climate change, meager development assistance, and the violation of international treaties such as the Geneva Conventions.
While many factors contributed to America’s destabilizing actions, a powerful one is anti-intellectualism, exemplified recently by Republican vice-presidential nominee Sarah Palin’s surging popularity.
By anti-intellectualism, I mean especially an aggressively anti-scientific perspective, backed by disdain for those who adhere to science and evidence.
The challenges faced by a major power like the US require rigorous analysis of information according to the best scientific principles.
Climate change, for example, poses dire threats to the planet that must be assessed according to prevailing scientific norms and the evolving capacity of climate science.
The Nobel Prize-winning global scientific process called the Inter-Governmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has set the gold standard for scientific rigor in analyzing the threats of human-induced climate change.
We need scientifically literate politicians adept at evidence-based critical thinking to translate these findings and recommendations into policy and international agreements.
In the US, however, the attitudes of President Bush, leading Republicans, and now Sarah Palin, have been the opposite of scientific.
The White House did all it could for eight years to hide the overwhelming scientific consensus that humans are contributing to climate change.
The Wall Street Journal has similarly peddled anti-science and pseudo-science to oppose policies to fight human-induced climate change.
These anti-scientific approaches affected not only climate policy, but also foreign policy.
The US went to war in Iraq on the basis of Bush’s gut instincts and religious convictions, not rigorous evidence.
They reflect the fact that a significant portion of American society, which currently votes mainly Republican, rejects or is simply unaware of basic scientific evidence regarding climate change, biological evolution, human health, and other fields.
These voters generally do not reject the benefits of technologies that result from modern science, but they do reject the evidence and advice of scientists regarding public policies.
Recent survey data by the Pew Foundation found that while 58% of Democrats believe that human beings are causing global warming, only 28% of Republicans do.
Similarly, a 2005 survey found that 59% of self-professed conservative Republicans rejected any theory of evolution, while 67% of liberal Democrats accepted some version of evolutionary theory.
To be sure, some of these deniers are simply scientifically ignorant, having been failed by the poor quality of science education in America.
But others are biblical fundamentalists, who reject modern science because they take the word of the Bible as literally true.
They reject geological evidence of climate change because they reject the science of geology itself.
All of the great religions have traditions of fruitful interchange with – and, indeed, support for – scientific inquiry.
The Golden Age of Islam a millennium ago was also the age in which Islamic science led the world.
Pope John Paul II declared his support for the basic science of evolution, and Roman Catholic bishops are strongly in favor of limiting human-induced climate change, based on the scientific evidence.
Several leading scientists, including one of the world’s greatest biologists, E.O. Wilson, have reached out to religious communities to support the fight against human-induced climate change and the fight for biological conservation, and those religious communities have reached back in harmony with science.
The problem is an aggressive fundamentalism that denies modern science, and an aggressive anti-intellectualism that views experts and scientists as the enemy.
After all, that kind of extremism can even lead to war, based on perverted views that a particular war is God’s will rather than a failure of politics and cooperation.
In many statements, Palin seems intent on invoking God in her judgments about war, an ominous sign for the future if she is elected.
She would certainly stoke many enemies who will look to their own brands of fundamentalism to strike back at the US.
Extremists on both sides end up putting at risk the vast majority of humans who are neither extremists nor anti-science fundamentalists.
It is difficult to know for sure what is giving rise to fundamentalism in so many parts of the world.
What is happening in the US, for example, is not happening in Europe, but it is of course characteristic of some parts of the Middle East and Central Asia.
Fundamentalism seems to emerge in times of far-reaching change, when traditional social arrangements come under threat.
The surge of modern American fundamentalism in politics dates to the civil rights era of the 1960’s, and at least partly reflects a backlash among whites against the growing political and economic strength of non-white and immigrant minority groups in US society.
Humanity’s only hope is that the vicious circle of extremism can be replaced by a shared global understanding of the massive challenges of climate change, food supplies, sustainable energy, water scarcity, and poverty.
Global scientific processes like the IPCC are critical, because they offer our best hope of forging a consensus based on the scientific evidence.
The US must return to the global consensus based on shared science rather than anti-intellectualism.
HONG KONG – Five years ago, few would have expected that China would produce four of the top ten global Internet companies (by number of visitors) – Alibaba, Baidu, Tencent, and Sohu – as well as innovative multinationals like Huawei and Xiaomi.
Nor would most have anticipated China’s increasing provision of global public goods, including its “one belt, one road” strategy, which aims to provide the infrastructure needed to knit Eurasia into a single vast market.
More remarkable news has just emerged: despite slowing economic-growth rates, China, together with Hong Kong, has recorded $29 billion in initial public offerings so far this year – almost twice the funds raised in US markets.
By any measure, the pace and scope of innovation in China has begun to increase.
The answer lies in the unprecedented challenges that China faces, including corruption, pollution, unsustainable local debts, ghost towns, shadow banks, inefficient state-owned enterprises (SOEs), and excessive government control over the economy.
Certainly, no one would argue that these are positive developments for China; nonetheless, they have arguably been a blessing in disguise.
They have imbued reform efforts with a degree of urgency that has had a far-reaching impact; indeed, conventional GDP data do not reflect the scale of the transformation that they are driving.
Of course, China has long been committed to market-driven structural reforms, at the national and municipal levels.
It could not have attained its position as the world’s second-largest economy otherwise.
But the key to China’s success has been constant experimentation, and the pursuit of that credo appears to have intensified.
For example, the networking of telecommunications, roads, rail, air, and maritime transport enabled China to become a global hub for the production of consumer durables, and improve their distribution.
More recently, China began to apply the same approach to building a more innovative, knowledge-based economy – one in which the services sectors, together with domestic consumption, drive growth.
As a result, the country has increasingly been focusing on the so-called “killer apps” that, according to the historian Niall Ferguson, drove the West’s rise to economic dominance: competition, science, property, modern medicine, consumerism, and an ethic of hard work.
In particular, China has worked to boost market competition and foster science and innovation, with progress in these areas underpinned by efforts to improve governance, strengthen mechanisms of accountability, and boost investment in public goods.
Crucially, even as China’s specific goals have shifted, its policymakers have adhered to the experimental approach that has served the country so well thus far.
Indeed, it was the combination of broad-based education, openness to science and innovation, investment in advanced telecommunications infrastructure, and knowhow in manufacturing smart-phones that fueled China’s rapid advancement in the e-tail and Internet industries.
This openness to innovation – along with what some say is lax regulation – also allowed platforms like Alibaba to integrate payments and logistics before many Western players did.
China’s “learning by doing” approach is likely to continue to yield innovative solutions to emerging problems.
For example, faced with a shrinking labor force, the government has ramped up investment in robotic automation and other productivity-enhancing technologies.
The impact on China’s competitiveness of rising real wages – which have been increasing by more than 15% annually since 2008 – will, the country’s leaders expect, ultimately be offset by the benefits of productivity-led growth, not to mention the much-needed increase in domestic consumption.
Of course, China’s approach has brought significant stresses, setbacks, and failures.
China’s real-estate, credit, and stock-market bubbles – which produced ghost towns, bad local debts, and stock-price volatility – attest to that.
But the policy decisions that gave rise to these problems – decentralizing control over land and permitting markets to direct the flow of talents, trade, investment, and capital – have also been critical to progress.
Rather than avoiding risk, they remain prepared to reverse failing policies; and, if necessary, they are willing to pay for mistakes.
Given the savings the country has built up, reflected in bulging foreign-exchange reserves, the central government has the fiscal room to afford it.
Today’s anti-corruption campaign should be viewed as an effort by China’s leaders to correct another negative consequence of past policies.
The approach is two-pronged: the government is privatizing some SOEs, so that market competition can check the behavior of corporate managers, while treating the managers of other (typically larger) SOEs as public servants, subject to the increasingly severe rules of public accountability, including party discipline.
China’s government is running real risks as it pushes through structural reforms that are unprecedented in speed, scale, and complexity.
Fortunately, China has both the experience and the wherewithal to experiment with the next stage of structural transformation.
SEOUL – If you chase two rabbits at once, the old saying goes, both will escape.
And yet this is precisely what many governments are required to do: pursue both growth and distributional fairness.
The two objectives, though not incompatible, are entirely different from one another, and few policy tools can simultaneously help to achieve both.
Much theoretical and empirical research demonstrates that opening trade can spur a country’s GDP growth.
But increasing a pie’s size does not guarantee that it will be shared fairly.
Often, the incremental growth that comes with a trade opening is unevenly shared; moreover, in many cases, some receive a smaller share than they did before.
Here is where government must intervene using its traditional tools, taxation and redistribution, as well as complementary policies such as social safety nets and adjustment assistance.
Similarly, from a global perspective, opening trade can contribute to the world’s overall economic growth, but does not guarantee that the benefits will be fairly distributed among countries.
Some say that no country loses, in absolute terms, from opening trade; otherwise, they would not participate in free-trade deals.
Still, the uneven distribution of the benefits created by a global trade opening means that some countries, especially the least developed, gain little in comparative terms, and are possibly even hurt.
This explains growing concern about the role of trade in development, despite the obvious fact that increased global trade has lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty in recent decades.
Unlike individual countries, there is no central authority that can enforce redistribution of wealth around the globe, so the problem of fairness must be addressed through the development mandates embedded in trade negotiations.
A key aspect of these development concerns is identifying the appropriate balance in any trade agreement.
“Special and differential treatment” is the technical term used in trade negotiations to indicate that the balance must be tilted toward developing countries, with the extent of this treatment to be decided by the parties to the talks.
But, while the tendency in current trade negotiations to allow developing countries to open their markets less than others helps to achieve more balance, it may undermine the original goals of enhancing efficiency and boosting growth.
And, in the end, this focus on the defensive side of trade liberalization makes negotiations more difficult.
For example, one of the critical issues blocking progress on the World Trade Organization’s Doha Development Agenda of global free-trade talks centers on the extent to which major developing countries should open their markets.
A better method of seeking balance is to give developing countries greater access to global markets, including those of other developing countries.
Yet, as of now, there is neither the will nor the energy to adopt this approach.
And, for developing countries that lack supply-side capacity, greater access to the global market is a moot point, as they remain far from even considering what size their share of it should be.
Because “aid for trade” – assistance for developing countries that aims to ease their trade-related constraints – takes the form of financial support, a practical issue is whether donors can maintain their level of funding, given today’s economic difficulties.
Moreover, an intrinsic and often neglected problem is how to divide management of aid-and-trade schemes among international and domestic institutions.
It is the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund that are better equipped to deal with aid issues.
Within member governments, relations with the WTO are usually the responsibility of the trade or foreign ministry, while multilateral financial institutions, including the regional development banks, are generally the responsibility of the finance ministry.
Thus, aid for trade, one of the key tasks on the WTO agenda, has weak institutional links to trade negotiations.
In fact, it might be more accurate to say that it is wholly separate.
The Marrakesh Agreement, which established the WTO as the successor to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade in 1994, sets out the purpose of achieving greater coherence between the WTO and other international agencies.
One particularly noteworthy initiative is the Enhanced Integrated Framework for least-developed countries, which encompasses extensive engagement and coordination among partner agencies, including the IMF, the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, the World Bank, and the WTO.
A concrete funding mechanism in trade agreements warrants serious consideration, particularly in areas such as the WTO’s trade-facilitation negotiations, where capacity-building in developing countries is a key issue.
Nonetheless, requiring donations from member countries would be a step in the wrong direction; the WTO is not an aid agency.
Rather, WTO trade agreements could establish effective links with multilateral and regional development banks, thereby helping to realize the principle of closer international coordination set out in the Marrakesh Agreement.
But doing so requires innovative approaches that help to ensure that trade serves developing countries, rather than vice versa.
CHICAGO – Throughout the West, declining standards in science education are threatening future prosperity.
Since the mid-nineteenth century, the West has depended on technical innovation and scientific derring-do for its influence and growth.
But the West now faces serious competition from the rising nations of Asia, where education in math and science is flourishing.
In general, competition in science and technology is a blessing – the more advanced a nation is, the better a customer it is.
And collaboration and exchange of people make for profitable businesses and higher standards of living.
The West, particularly the United States, has lived through such a moment of recognition before, when the USSR launched Sputnik in 1957.
The so-called “Sputnik shock” convinced America and the West of the need for radical reform of science education, particularly recruitment, training, and retention of teachers.
Mathematics, the foundation for all science, depends on its concise language and logical ordering.
Physics, once the subject most dependent on mathematics, provides knowledge about the structure of atoms, and the use of mathematics there has now spread to chemistry and biology.
Essentially all phenomena in chemistry find explanations in the quantum atom, while chemistry and physics undergird molecular biology, which, since the discovery of DNA in the 1950s, dominates modern biology.
All other sciences – geology, astronomy, neuroscience, oceanography, and myriad hyphenated subjects – depend upon overlapping combinations of biology, chemistry, and physics.
Yet today, the vast majority of high schools start the study of science with biology.
In America, the requirement is usually for three years of science study, and, today, most U.S. students take science in this order: biology, chemistry, physics.
I believe that it is obsolete, pedagogically disastrous, and ignores the tremendous scientific advances of the twentieth century.
Other industrial nations may cycle through pieces of the disciplines, missing the essential coherence of the P-C-B sequence.
In studying physics, students study algebra simultaneously, motivating them with a sense of the power of mathematics.
Moreover, physics begins with everyday phenomena requiring few new words (as opposed to conventional ninth-grade biology): motion, velocity, acceleration, falling objects, a sense of gravity as a force, and some new concepts, e.g. mass, momentum, and energy, but with crisp definitions.
Ninth-grade physics, unlike ninth-grade biology, illustrates the grand sweep of the laws of nature, and the power of an equation to describe a vast number of different phenomena can be taught at this level.
Classroom experiments make use of simple laboratory devices: inclined planes, pulleys, springs, simple pendulums, but the rules that are revealed have validity out in the real world.
The fall of a weight (or an apple!) can be connected to the moon’s orbit around the earth and even to the structure of galaxies holding billions of solar systems.
Indeed, we can study, on a convenient classroom scale, the same forces that move atoms and planets.
The last month or more of ninth-grade physics introduces atoms, invisible to the naked eye but with strong indirect support.
Here physics introduces scales of distances, atoms to galaxies, scales of time, nanoseconds to centuries, and scales of energy from electron volts to megajoules.
These orders of magnitude require metaphors and repetition, but they serve as crucial concepts in our world, especially in cosmology and in evolutionary biology.
Tenth-grade chemistry makes use of ninth-grade physics, deepening and enriching the student’s grasp, but no basic chemical or biological principles are required for ninth-grade physics.
Instead, qualitative applications of physics to chemistry and biology heighten interest and emphasize the connections.
Chemistry is largely a study of molecules, and when they are complex, there is the mysterious transition to life and biology.
It was not a physicist, but a biologist, Julius Meyer, who first proposed the law of conservation of energy from a study of biological energy processes.
The chemist Dalton first gave a proof of the existence of atoms and the engineer Sadi Carnot first gave a proof of the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
The sequence Physics-Chemistry-Biology implies that continuous collegial professional development for teachers is essential.
Teachers (including those in mathematics) should meet regularly to plot the evolution of their courses, their essential coherence, and the inclusion of stories that illustrate how science works.
I know of more than 1,000 high schools that have implemented the P-C-B sequence.
Because this sequence is for all students, what will be retained in the future are the stories and, most importantly, a scientific way of thinking.
There is no job, no profession, civic activity that will not profit from this kind of education.
But to restore the vitality of science, we need to look at the entire educational system: teachers from pre-school through high school, state and national standards, productive and educationally reinforcing assessments, teaching materials and educational technology, and progress in the neurosciences, cognitive psychology, developmental biology, and nutrition.
And leadership for this huge revolutionary effort will probably have to come from visionary business executives whose profits depend on education and rationality.
ROME – Twenty years after the collapse of Yugoslavia and the communist regime in Albania, the western Balkans region is at a turning point once again.
Slovenia is in the European Union, Croatia is very close to membership, and all of the region’s other countries have started along the EU path.
Indeed, although EU integration is already bringing democracy and stability to the countries of the Balkans, it is an unfinished job, and completing that task is both vital and uncertain.
The current economic crisis is leading public opinion in the western Balkans to lose confidence that peace and economic growth are still within reach, creating the risk of a possible slowdown in the integration process.
It is our task – with the support of the new Bosnian leadership – to redirect this approach to a genuine European mindset.
Democratic reforms are proving to be an increasingly effective cure for the instability created in the past by nationalism and ethnic strains.
The key issue is to ensure that the western Balkans keeps its focus on the European agenda, which means that the EU must provide guidance and encouragement through tangible initiatives.
That is why, at the EU-United States summit held in Prague last year, I proposed an eight-pronged initiative, elements of which have now been fully or partially taken up, including the Conference held in Sarajevo last June where the EU reiterated its commitment to the integration process of the Balkans region as whole.
New EU membership applications confirm the desire of Balkan governments to engage seriously in internal reforms.
But the road to EU membership involves painful sacrifice, so each country should be judged on its own merits.
From its part, Europe is delivering as soon as the counties are adopting the necessary reforms.
The EU needs to give clear signals to public opinion across the region that meeting EU benchmarks has tangible effects on their lives.
Serbia is emblematic of the importance of doing so, as public support there for the EU integration process has risen sharply in a only months, from 40% to 60%, thanks in large part to the EU’s decision of earlier this year to liberalize the visa regime.
The EU integration process is also proving a powerful driver for much-needed reform in Bosnia.
Despite the country’s worrisome political stalemate, and the seeming entrenchment, at least for the moment, of ethnic politics, the chance to grab the “low-hanging fruit” of visa liberalization did encourage the Bosnian leadership to make a serious effort at reform in a relatively short period of time.
Over the last 20 years, the goal of EU membership has proved an invaluable asset for stabilizing, democratizing, and modernizing the western Balkans.
Now it is up to leaders in the region to overcome the remaining obstacles, starting with an understanding between the governments of Belgrade and Pristina.
The EU has offered to play a facilitating role: we urge both leaderships to promptly seize this opportunity, with a view to their states’ further steps along the path towards the European family to which all Balkan countries naturally belong.
The EU’s ability to overcome “enlargement fatigue” and maintain its commitments to the region are also dependent on public support, so we must not stint in our efforts to convey to our citizens the political and economic advantages of accession of the countries of the western Balkans to the EU.
FEZ – Just over a year ago, the Arab Spring sparked dramatic change throughout the Arab world.
Popular movements have brought a range of avowedly Islamist political parties to power, replacing the largely secular former regimes.
What that will mean for these countries, and for the region, is one of today’s central geopolitical questions.
In North Africa, two Islamist parties have come fully to power via democratic elections: al-Nahda (Renaissance) in Tunisia, where the Arab Spring began, and the Justice and Development Party (PJD) in Morocco, both of which now lead new coalition governments.
Whereas a popular revolution produced regime change in Tunisia, Morocco underwent a peaceful transformation that left the monarchy in place.
Last July, Moroccans voted overwhelmingly to approve a new constitution that shifts executive power from the king to the prime minister, who will now be fully responsible for the cabinet, the civil service, and the implementation of government policies.
The king retains some prerogatives, such as the authority to select the prime minister (from the parliament’s majority party) and the head of the army.
Furthermore, like heads of state in other parliamentary systems, he has the right to appoint the government ministers and ambassadors, dissolve the parliament, and dismiss the cabinet.
While the PJD’s success was based on institution-building within a constitutional monarchy, al-Nahda has revolutionized the Tunisian system.
But both parties won after running on a moderate platform of constitutionalism, separation of powers, civil liberties, and women’s rights.
This new political reality in the Maghreb will bring Europe – particularly France, the region’s old colonial master – face-to-face with Islamist governments determined to promote a new type of relationship.
Currently, the Maghreb countries suffer from soaring unemployment, poverty, and high prices for basic commodities.
In response, both al-Nahda and the PJD are emphasizing job creation, free trade, foreign investment, and a crackdown on the corruption that has plagued their countries’ economies.
These governments’ first major test of economic stewardship will be how they treat the tourism industry.
Although Western tourism is a critically important source of employment and foreign currency in both countries, some Muslims have criticized the industry for promoting alcohol and other relaxed social conventions that threaten Islamic values.
So far, both al-Nahda and the PJD have taken a pragmatic stance.
They recognize that, while their supporters may be devout Muslims, they also need to earn a living; empty hotels and beaches would be economically disastrous.
Thus, tourism professionals in both countries have received strong government assurances that business will continue as usual.
Some European analysts predict that, over the longer term, greater stability will follow the political changes in the Maghreb, with perhaps more than a million unemployed Moroccan and Tunisian immigrants returning home if their countries’ economies improve.
Islamist parties will now have enormous influence on economic policy, after decades of official separation of mosque and state.
Islamic banking, for example, may soon be introduced, though some local and foreign investors argue that sharia regulations could drive away much-needed foreign investment.
There are also concerns about inexperienced Islamist officials’ ability to run finance ministries.
But the region’s Islamist parties appear to be conscious of these risks, and determined to mitigate them.
They know that they need economic growth to curb unemployment and pay for social services, so they are working to bolster the private sector.
In many cases, they are even advocating the kind of free-market policies that their secular predecessors favored.
Until now, less than 2% of the Maghreb countries’ foreign trade has remained within the region.
If the region’s new leaders can integrate their economies, a market of more than 75 million consumers would attract more foreign investment and trade with the rest of the world.
Before an economically unified Maghreb can be realized, however, inter-state conflicts such as the Algerian-Moroccan dispute over the “Western” Sahara must be resolved.
Otherwise, it will be difficult even to conceive a common future – without which the economic grievances that fueled the Maghreb’s revolutions are likely to continue.
Much like the Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt, al-Nahda and the PJD will have to marginalize Islamic extremists in their movements, such as the Salafis, and adopt a pragmatic approach.
To succeed economically, they will need Western support – and the West will not be eager to fund radical Islamist governments.
As they negotiate the realities of modern economic life, the Maghreb’s Islamist ruling parties are likely to lose some supporters.
But, unless they are willing to break with the past, they will not succeed in the present.
BRUSSELS – For Europe, the defining event of 2014 was Russia’s annexation of Crimea and military intervention in eastern Ukraine’s Donbas region.
The Kremlin’s actions directly challenged key principles that have guided Europe for more than six decades, particularly the renunciation of the use of force to alter national borders.
It has often been argued that Russia was reacting to the perceived encroachment on its “near abroad” by the European Union and NATO.
But history suggests a simpler explanation: A decade of steadily rising oil prices had emboldened Russia, leaving it ready to seize any opportunity to deploy its military power.
Indeed, the Soviet Union had a similar experience 40 years ago, when a protracted period of rising oil revenues fueled an increasingly assertive foreign policy, which culminated in the 1979 invasion of Afghanistan.
Oil prices quadrupled following the first oil embargo in 1973, and the discovery of large reserves in the 1970s underpinned a massive increase in Soviet output.
As a result, from 1965 to 1980, the value of Soviet oil production soared by a factor of almost 20.
Burgeoning oil wealth bolstered the regime’s credibility – not least by enabling a significant increase in military spending – and rising economic and military strength gave the Soviet Union’s geriatric leadership a rejuvenated sense of invulnerability.
The invasion of Afghanistan was not merely an improvised response to a local development (a putsch in Kabul); it was also a direct result of this trend.
Putin’s reaction to the Euromaidan demonstrations in Ukraine followed a similar pattern.
In both cases, a seemingly low-cost opportunity was viewed as yielding a large strategic gain – at least in the short run.
Indeed, while the devastating consequences of the Soviet Union’s Afghan adventure are now well known, at the time the invasion was viewed as a major defeat for the West.
The Soviet army’s retreat in 1988 is usually ascribed to the Afghan insurgency, led by Pakistan-trained mujahedeen with support from the United States.
But the decline in oil prices during the 1980s, which cut the value of Soviet output to one-third of its peak level, undoubtedly played a role.
Indeed, it led to a period of extreme economic weakness – a key factor in the Soviet Union’s dissolution just three years after its withdrawal from Afghanistan.
During the 1990s, Russia was too preoccupied with its own post-Soviet political turmoil to object to EU or NATO enlargement to the east.
Nor did it have the wherewithal, as its own production and oil prices continued to decline, hitting a trough of $10 per barrel in 1999-2000.
Russia’s stance changed gradually during the early 2000s, as world oil prices – and Russian output – recovered, reinvigorating the country’s economic base at a time when its leadership was becoming increasingly autocratic.
Only then did Russia start to claim that the US and its European allies had offered some implicit pledge not to expand NATO eastward.
With oil prices steadily rising, the value of Russian oil production reached a new peak, roughly ten times the 1999 level, in 2008;
Though prices collapsed during the Great Recession of 2009, they quickly recovered, with the value of Russian output reaching another peak in 2012-2013 – precisely when Russia’s position on the EU-Ukraine association agreement hardened.
Given that the EU and Ukraine had already been negotiating the deal for more than two years, without much reaction from Russia, the EU was blindsided by the Kremlin’s sudden sharp objections.
Clearly, Russia’s attitude toward its near abroad is not quite as erratic as it may seem.
When oil prices rise, Russia expresses its latent resentments more aggressively, often employing its military.
Moreover, at higher prices, the oil industry crowds out other export sectors that support open markets and a less aggressive foreign policy.
The Soviet war in Afghanistan was followed by a long-term decline in oil prices.
The recent price slide – to $50-60 per barrel, halving the value of Russia’s oil production – suggests that history is about to repeat itself.
Western sanctions, which seemed to constitute only a pinprick a few months ago, appear to have inflicted serious damage, with the ruble having lost nearly half its value against the US dollar last year.
Though financial markets will calm down when the ruble’s exchange rate settles into its new equilibrium, Russia’s economy will remain weak, forcing the country’s leaders to make tough choices.
Against this background, a stalemate in the Donbas seems more likely than an outright offensive aimed at occupying the remainder of the region and establishing a land corridor to Crimea – the outcome that many in the West initially feared.
President Vladimir Putin’s new Novorossya project simply cannot progress with oil prices at their current level.
But no amount of posturing can offset the disintegration of the economy’s material base caused by the new equilibrium in the oil market.
In this sense, the US has come to Europe’s rescue in a different way: Its production of shale oil and gas is likely to play a greater role in keeping Russia at bay than NATO troops on Europe’s eastern borders.
ADELAIDE – Protectionist sentiment and fear of globalization are on the rise.
In the United States, presidential candidates appeal to anxious voters by blaming the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) for the erosion of the country’s manufacturing base.
Liberal trade initiatives have run into trouble in Congress, while new trade barriers have been mooted for products flooding in from China.
France has dealt the Doha round of World Trade Organization (WTO) negotiations a blow by rejecting the outline deal on agriculture.
European Commission President José Manuel Barroso believes that protectionist pressures are increasing.
When the Doha trade round was launched shortly after September 11, 2001, there was plenty of international goodwill.
But disenchantment with globalization – and, in some regions, fear of immigration– has since set in.
A recent Financial Times/Harris poll in the US, Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Spain found people nearly three times more likely to say that globalization is negative than positive.
Free trade would lead to an overwhelming boost to welfare everywhere, but especially in the developing world.
Grasping these benefits is potentially one of this generation’s greatest challenges.
Increased negative sentiment could have the worst possible result: not just Doha’s failure, but also the raising of trade and immigration barriers.
These barriers remain largely because further liberalization would redistribute jobs, income, and wealth in ways that governments fear would reduce their chances of remaining in power – and their own wealth in countries where corruption is rife.
But there is a big difference between a low-quality result and one that is more comprehensive.
If little more is achieved than phasing out farm export subsidies and a modest reduction in agricultural domestic support, our analysis shows that developing countries as a group would gain nothing, while high-income countries would gain just US$18 billion per year by 2015.
By contrast, if developing countries cut their tariffs by the same proportion as high-income countries, and services and investment were also liberalized, the global annual gains could climb as high as US$120 billion, with US$17 billion going to the world’s poorest countries.
Recast as after calculating the net present value of the stream of future benefits, a realistic Doha outcome could increase global income by more than $3000 billion per year, $2500 billion of which would go to the developing world.
In addition, the experiences of successful reformers like Korea, China, India, and Chile suggest that trade liberalization immediately boosts annual economic growth rates by several percentage points for many years.
Eliminating subsidies and trade barriers would mean that resources could be used more efficiently, so there would be more scope to reduce inequality and poverty, social tensions, environmental degradation, malnutrition, and disease.
Firms and workers would need to adjust as reform forces some industries to downsize or close and allows others to expand.
Yet the benefits of a successful Doha round are between 45 and 440 times higher than these costs.
An “alternative” to Doha, whereby other high-income countries would follow the European Union’s offer of duty-free access to products from Least-Developed Countries (LDCs) and African, Caribbean, and Pacific (ACP) small countries, would involve only a tiny fraction of global gains from trade reform.
Moreover, it may well hurt other poor countries – thereby worsening inequality – by encouraging resources to be allocated to activities that become uncompetitive following the next World Trade Organization agreement.
If trade liberalization in goods and services proves too politically difficult to achieve in this decade, the benefits of liberalizing international labor flows is worth contemplating – not least because otherwise illegal migration is likely to increase.
Historical experience shows that migration is the fastest way to bring about a convergence in living standards.
We examined the costs and benefits of an expansion in international migration over a 25-year period, amounting to a 3% boost in host countries’ labor forces by 2025.
The costs would include one-off expenses to migrants: transport, obtaining visas and permits, and finding housing, schooling, and employment, as well as the emotional cost of separation from family.
There are also one-off costs to host-country governments, such as processing applications and providing initial help with housing and welfare.
These costs have been estimated at between $14,000 and $42,000 per worker and family (shared equally by migrants and host governments).
The global net benefit of the increased flow of migrants for 25 years is between $13 trillion and $39 trillion – close to the median estimated gains from the Doha round.
Even if freeing up immigration multilaterally seems too difficult to include as part of a Doha round agreement, individual countries could do so unilaterally with the stroke of a pen.
The economic logic is compelling: removing trade and migration barriers would be an exceptionally wise investment.
The prospect of multiple referenda on the European Union Constitution has dramatically altered the betting on ratification.
Both europhiles and eurocrats shudder at the prospect that rejection in several member states, particularly in a large one, might kill the project, leaving the Union to muddle through with the Nice Treaty.
On the other hand, if the protagonists are patient, the winds of democracy could lead to a stronger constitution, free of the risks of economic and judicial nightmare that some aspects of the present draft entail.
The EU urgently needs to democratize its procedures and reorganize its institutions to ensure that this year's enlargement does not lead to bureaucratic deadlock.
But the elevation of the Social Chapter, previously a list of good intentions, to the status of fundamental constitutional rights, threatens to encumber workers and businesses in the member states with burdensome judicial proceedings and expensive social entitlements written by judges in Luxembourg whose last word is beyond appeal.
The inclusion in Part II of the draft on "social rights" - such as the right not to be unjustly dismissed, or the right to receive old-age pensions, unemployment compensation, and health benefits (regardless of cost) - is in no way necessary to the functioning of the whole.
For instance, no economic cost is too great for the defense of freedom of speech.
The desirability of generous public pensions, on the other hand, cannot be dissociated from their cost to taxpayers.
Social protections should be framed in laws enacted by democratically elected legislators, who are well placed to weigh the costs and benefits for their constituents.
The most ardent advocate of expanded health care rights should agree that the forum for that advocacy is the Parliament, not the European Court of Justice.
These protections have no place in a constitution, particularly one that cannot be easily amended.
The fact that certain "social rights" have made their way into some national constitutions on the Continent is no reason to impose them, as the present draft does, on the entire Union.
It is noteworthy that in the Scandinavian countries, which enjoy some of the most progressive social protections in Europe, these benefits are provided by statutory laws enacted by legislatures rather than by courts enacting constitutional "rights."
They are the social dividend, allocated by national parliaments, of real economic growth.
Supporters of the European Constitution in France, on both the left and the right, shrug and say that including the Social Chapter in the draft is a compromise.
The "social rights" in Part II are seen as compensating voters on the left for, say, enshrining "competition" as a fundamental objective of the Union in Part I. But neither provision belongs in the Constitution.
Natural monopolies are sometimes economically desirable, and it is legislators, not judges, who should decide whether and when they are to be permitted.
In the constitutional convention, the Blair government accepted the inclusion of its provisions in the body of the text, but insisted on language limiting their reach.
Article II-52 states that the Fundamental Rights in the Constitution (including its 12 "social rights") apply only to the actions of the Union, and of member states when they are implementing Union decisions .
If EU environmental directives, for instance, call for the closure of a heavily polluting plant in Britain, the Constitution would give labor unions the right to judicial appeals against the resulting redundancies.
Fortunately, this fault line in the British safeguards can be corrected without jeopardizing the document.
The simplest solution is to remove the Fundamental Rights of Part II from the body of the text, and give them the status the Social Chapter had in the Treaty of Amsterdam: a declaration of intentions appended to the Treaty.
All traditional individual rights are already covered in the Declaration of Human Rights, which will continue to be enforced by the court in Strasbourg.
"Social rights" should not become mandates for judges; they should remain a guide to legislators.
If a political compromise is needed, "competition" should be removed as a fundamental Union objective.
If this preferred solution proves unacceptable, an alternative would be to strengthen Article II-52, to state clearly that the twelve "social rights" of Part II apply to the Union, but not to the member states, even when these are implementing Union directives.
If the Union decides, as it could, that all member states must provide public health care for all unemployed persons, it would be up to national parliaments, not 25 judges in Luxembourg, to determine how to address that objective.
This would take some of the teeth out of the Union's social directives, and would give real substance to the principle of subsidiarity.
By excising from the draft Constitution the prospect of a welfare state run by judges, its framers will increase the chances that Britain and other doubters will, in the end, ratify the final product.
A year ago, Angela Merkel, Germany’s charming new chancellor, was in the final phase of her election campaign.
The incumbent, Gerhard Schröder, lagged so far behind her Christian Democrats (CDU) in public opinion polls that she thought she would win a landslide victory and could therefore afford to expound the cruelties of the liberal austerity program delineated in her electoral campaign.
She even announced a value-added tax increase (which her new government has, indeed, decided to implement in 2007).
When she named the law professor Paul Kirchhof, who advocated a flat tax, as her candidate for finance minister, Merkel’s electoral cakewalk turned into a nightmare.
She lost nearly her entire lead, and in the end won by only a tiny margin – a margin too small to form her preferred coalition with the liberal Free Democrats.
Instead, she had to form a coalition with Schröder’s Social Democrats (SPD), though without Schröder himself.
She won the respect of her European Union partners and managed to salve Germany’s damaged relationship with the United States.
Her unpretentious manner and intellectual capacity (she holds a doctorate in physics) quickly won her the respect of many, even of Vladimir Putin, whose language she speaks fluently.
However, Merkel has disappointed everyone who hoped that she would continue and even expand Schröder’s domestic economic reform agenda.
While her party program speaks of opening union contracts, relaxing job protection, and, in particular, overhauling the incentive structure of the welfare system, her government has been mostly silent about these issues.
The cautious steps toward wage subsidies that her government has taken are mere window dressing and cannot be taken seriously.
Thus, Merkel has so far dampened any hope that the important and hard reforms that she announced during her campaign and that Germany urgently needs will be carried out under the CDU-SPD “grand coalition” government.
To be sure, she has put healthcare reform and a reform of company taxation on the agenda, but the plans presented so far give no indication of a major breakthrough.
This stagnation in policymaking has been heavily criticized by the media and the influential Wirtschaftsrat (Economic Council), an association of entrepreneurs who sympathize with the CDU.
Even Germany’s Christian Democratic president, Horst Köhler, has continually reminded the government of the need to press ahead with economic reforms in order to pave the way for sustainable growth.
The superficial answer is that her coalition partner, the SPD, is not willing to go further.
But if this is the explanation, the next question is why the SPD is unwilling to continue Schröder’s reform course.
Such questions lead to the real explanation of Germany’s political stagnation: there is simply no popular majority in favor of liberal reforms, because in the near term such reforms would create too many losers.
Germany’s extensive welfare system spends 31% of the country’s GDP for entitlement programs operated by the government sector.
No less than 41% of the voting-age adult population lives primarily on government transfers such as state pensions, full-scale public stipends, unemployment benefits, disability benefits, and social assistance.
Among those adults who actually vote, recipients of public transfers form a clear majority.
Indeed, the upper 10% of income recipients pay more than 50% of aggregate income tax revenue, and the upper 20% pays about 80%, while 40% of income recipients pay no income taxes whatsoever.
Small wonder that a huge majority of the population – and even a slight majority of CDU voters – prefer a strengthening of the welfare state to a more market-oriented system.
The SPD learned about these preferences the hard way, when Schröder’s liberal reforms, as cautious as they were, prompted an internal revolt and induced his predecessor as party chairman and temporary former Minister of Finance, Oskar Lafontaine, to desert the SPD and found a new party.
Lafontaine now plays directly on the preferences of public transfer recipients and firmly occupies the left margin of German politics, dreaming the dream of the everlasting welfare state that can draw on unlimited resources.
Indeed, after Lafontaine’s “The Left” party merged with eastern Germany’s ex-communists, it secured a firm base among voters, changing the political equilibrium in the country.
Faced with the prospect of losing members and voters to the new party, the SPD simply cannot afford to continue Schröder’s reform agenda.
Many Christian Democrats may be dreaming of the next election, and a new coalition with the Free Democrats – and perhaps the Greens – that would carry out the necessary welfare and labor market reforms.
But the reality is that the CDU leadership is re-orienting the party toward more socialist attitudes in order to attract a larger share of the electorate, making postponement of the necessary reforms all but inevitable.
In the midst of such political machinations, Germany is gradually losing its future.
Hans-Werner Sinn is the Director of the Ifo Institute for Economic Research in Munich.
Copyright: Project Syndicate, 2006. www.project-syndicate.org
NEW YORK – Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s visit to Washington, DC, in June garnered little public attention outside of India.
For good reason: the rapprochement between the world’s two most populous democracies could shape the world’s future.
It is worth noting that in his address to the US Congress, Modi invoked the word “partner” or “partnership” no fewer than 15 times.
The official joint statement released by the two governments described India as a “Major Defense Partner” of the United States, eligible for advanced technologies with military applications.
The relationship between India and the US has evolved from one of cool distance to strategic proximity in a generation – lightning fast for geopolitics.
The factors underlying this shift merit attention, for many of them are likely to bring the two countries even closer.
The Cold War’s end was a significant part of the bilateral rapprochement, because it eliminated the possibility of India’s continued association with the Soviet Union, as well as its rationale for embracing non-alignment.
For a long time, the US pursued an even-handed policy toward South Asia’s two most strategically important countries.
Nonetheless, during most of the Cold War, Pakistan was seen as a friendly country, whereas its great rival, India, was viewed as difficult.
This view was reinforced when Pakistan became the essential conduit of weapons to Afghans fighting the Soviet occupation of their country.
But the bond between the US and Pakistan weakened when Soviet forces withdrew from Afghanistan in 1989.
Relations suffered further from Pakistan’s development of nuclear weapons, its provision of sanctuary and support to the Taliban, and its willingness to extend hospitality to some of the world’s most dangerous terrorists, including Osama bin Laden.
As a result, US ties to India were no longer constrained by fear of complications in Pakistan.
The motivation is far more fundamental than the fact that India and China still have an unresolved border.
China’s rise has created a strong incentive for countries with a stake in Asia to increase their cooperation with the US, as well as with one another, to ensure that they can stand up to China’s political, military, and economic might.
Domestic politics also loom large in the relationship’s development – on both sides.
The decline of India’s Congress party reduced the influence of the political force most associated with maintaining distance from the US.
Meanwhile, there are now more than three million Indian-Americans, and, as with many other immigrant populations, they have become ever more prominent and powerful.
Supporting closer ties with India has become a rare example of bipartisan US foreign policy, and it can be expected to continue regardless of which party controls the White House or Congress after this November’s elections.
The breakthrough in bilateral ties came a decade ago, when the US lifted sanctions introduced in response to India’s nuclear weapons program and then signed an accord paving the way for US involvement in India’s civil nuclear energy program.
India, unlike both Pakistan and North Korea, is seen as a responsible nuclear power, a country the US now supports for membership in various groups designed to stem the further spread of nuclear materials and weapons.
Closer economic ties and large-scale collaboration on clean energy are a high priority.
One can also predict increased cooperation between the two countries’ military and intelligence establishments.
Indeed, joint efforts to keep the Indian Ocean open and safe are already a reality.
The US and India need not be formal allies for their relationship to have the desired effect on Chinese strategic calculations.
Bureaucracy, corruption, and poor infrastructure continue to hold back India’s economy.
Indian leaders must also be careful not to do or say things that could alienate the country’s large Muslim minority.
And they must still ensure that close ties with the US are not simply the policy of one prime minister or party.
This means getting the Congress party fully on board and overcoming the resistance of career officials to new ways of thinking and acting.
More than a half-century ago, in the early years of the Cold War, many in Washington saw India as a potential model of non-Communist political and economic development.
For many reasons, things did not work out that way, as India became economically statist, for a time politically authoritarian, and geopolitically closer to the USSR than US officials liked.
Now, however, India is emerging as a successful example of a market-oriented democracy with close ties to the US.
Second chances are rare in life, but both India and the US may be getting just that.
Over the past six months, attention and worry have shifted from America’s enormous trade deficit to its surging property markets and real-estate bubble.
At least two of the reasons for high – and rising – home prices in the United States are well understood.
What remains highly uncertain, however, is whether an obviously overheating market can be cooled without sending America, and its main trading partners around the world, into an economic tailspin.
The US housing boom is due, first, to low interest rates, which mean that large amounts of money can be borrowed for mortgages with moderate monthly payments.
And, with demand high and housing supply fixed – at least in the short run – prices go up.
Second, the 70-year period that began with the widespread diffusion of the automobile –during which one could get nearly anywhere in a typical metropolitan area in half an hour or less – is over.
Before there was widespread automobile ownership, land prices depended on location, and proximity to the central city or to the local railroad station carried a premium.
Now, with serious congestion slowing traffic in major cities to a crawl, the land gradient in housing prices is steep once again.
Perhaps this steepening of the location gradient could be delayed for a decade if we were willing to shift to denser residential patterns.
We could, for example, tear down San Francisco’s row houses and replace them with buildings more like those of New York’s Upper West Side.
These two factors – low mortgage rates, and the fact that the country has filled up so much that our cars no longer marginalize location costs – go a long way toward explaining the surge in housing prices over the past decade or so.
The bubble is filled by people with money who are buying extra houses because they think home prices will continue to rise, and by people without money who are buying $400,000 houses in less-fashionable neighborhoods with zero percent down and floating interest rates.
When the first group discovers that housing prices don’t always go up, they will try to dump their properties.
And when the second group discovers that interest rates don’t always stay low, many of them will be unable to meet their higher mortgage payments and will likewise try to dump their properties.
But if it does, it will probably be due to a sharp rise in interest rates.
First, investors, recognizing that the dollar is overvalued and that they are likely to suffer large losses when it returns to its fundamental value, could start selling their Treasury bonds, corporate bonds, and mortgage-backed securities.
At some point, the yields on bonds and mortgages will be high enough that investors’ appetite for yield will balance their fear of exchange-rate depreciation.
In the corridors around my office, all the economists agree that this factor should have pushed US interest rates up three years ago.
Or it could also mean that economists’ baseline model of the international economy – especially the assumption of “uncovered interest parity,” which holds that foreign interest income expressed in the domestic currency should equal the domestic interest rate – is simply wrong.
The second factor that could push US interest rates sharply upward is not fear of a decline in the future value of the dollar, but the fact of a past decline in its value.
A 40% fall in the value of the dollar – of which half passes through to increased dollar prices of imports – thus implies a 3.2% rise in the overall price level.
A Federal Reserve committed to effective price stability will likely raise interest rates rather than allow any year’s inflation rate to jump from 3% to 6%.
If there is a sharp spike in interest rates – caused either by capital flight in anticipation of a dollar decline or by tight monetary policy in reaction to a dollar decline comes to pass – we will see how good the Federal Reserve really is.
If interest rates rise too far, then the collapse in housing values will lead to large-scale foreclosures and a collapse in consumption spending as well.
This would mean a depression not just for the US, but for Asia and probably Europe as well, for the US can remain the world’s importer of last resort and guarantor of effective demand only as long as its domestic consumption is strong.
But if interest rates don’t rise far enough, the value of the dollar will spiral downward and US inflation will spiral upward like in the 1970’s, setting the stage for the type of extremely painful measures imposed by then Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker.
In these circumstances, straight is the gait and narrow is the path that the Federal Reserve will have to walk – hardly an enviable position.
And yet journalists – not very experienced reporters, to be sure – ask me who is likely to get the “plum job” of Fed Chair next year.
CAMBRIDGE: It is easy to idealize revolutions that happen somewhere else.
Across the West, people have been celebrating the tenth anniversary of the end of communism as the war won without firing a shot.
Across the former Soviet empire, genuine euphoria is tempered by ten hard years of change.
Some things happened as expected: Hungary is doing better than most, Estonia outpaced the rest of the Soviet Union, and Southern Europe is in trouble.
Everybody's "basket case" of 1989, Poland, became the region's dynamo.
The Czech Republic – everyone's favorite – went from Velvet revolution to muddied reformer.
It avoided the abyss that was widely predicted by the now unemployed Kremlinologists.
I myself thought that communism's collapse would deliver quicker social rejuvenation in Russia, although I argued from the start that Russia's road would be a hard slog, and that the country required substantial financial help from the West.
Despite the variety of transitions underway, there are some durable lessons that can probably be drawn by now from the experience of the postcommunist transitions:
Where the legal framework could be changed quickly, as in eliminating price controls and a myriad of subsidies, or assuring currency convertibility, market forces began to work quickly and efficiently.
Reforms unleashed the beneficial forces of supply and demand, as Poland's experience made dramatically evident, and brought an end to the endemic shortages of the old regime.
But when the new legal framework demanded the creation of working state institutions that took time to create, quick reforms often had less than the desired effect.
Speedy privatization, for example, especially the mass voucher schemes in Czechoslovakia, Russia, and many other former Soviet countries, did not work.
What is worse, when privatization was rushed through, the result was massive corruption, managerial plunder, and paralysis at the firm level.
Although some abuses could have been lessened, the main reason for failure was that reform of the state did not keep pace with economic reforms.
Some surprises of the postcommunist transition needn't have been such, if the different starting points had been properly considered.
Poland's chaos in the 1980s, for example, may have created the basis for rapid growth in the 1990s, because the dead hand of central planning had already been cut off when the reforms began.
Where central planning was alive, as in Czechoslovakia, it may have made it more difficult to break the mold of loss-making state enterprises.
In largely agricultural China, huge state industrial enterprises had been less important, so their reform could have been postponed, and reliance could be placed on "starting afresh."
But in the more "advanced" socialist countries, such as Russia, where 90% of the population was employed in state-owned industries, restructuring the state sector – a much harder job in many ways – was a necessity, and an obstacle to quick recovery.
Even when governments have good intentions, they tend to be corrupted, if power is unchecked.
Constitutions provide modest checks, but private associations of professionals, religions, and regions – the heart of civil society – provide the deeper balance.
Stalinist purges in Russia left no independent institutions to stop the depredations of corrupt officials, managers, and the state.
In Poland, by contrast, Communism never managed to destroy the Catholic Church or prevent the rise of the Solidarity movement.
(Stalin once complained that establishing party rule there was like putting a saddle on a cow.)
Solidarity unionists, even if they often opposed many specific policy proposals, stopped firm managers from stealing assets; and the Church provided a force with which all governments to reckon.
The closer a postcommunist country was to the European Union, the more successful and dynamic has been the transformation.
Countries such as Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Slovenia, Croatia, and the Baltic States, have done much better at attracting foreign investment, expanding exports, and stimulating economic growth than those whose markets were at a greater remove from the European Union.
Just as U.S. firms go next door to Mexico, German firms head for the immediate neighborhood to the East.
But 1989 also awakened ancient antipathies and mythologies that had been repressed in the Communist era.
Who would have thought that in the late 20th century Serbian mythologies over the Battle of Kosovo of 1389 could galvanize a population behind the murderous nationalism of Slobodan Milosevic?
Blame for failures does rest, in part, on the West, which was nonchalant in its efforts and stingy with its purse.
Here the West helped with initial balance of payments funds and later with debt cancellation.
Compare this with what happened in Russia, which was denied vitally needed funds and lasting debt relief.
Many American politicians and citizens felt that the U.S. had no business helping a former rival nation that still had more than 10,000 nuclear warheads.
What aid was given was a mere drop in the bucket when set against Russia's gargantuan financial and social needs.
The IMF actually provided most of its funds, but after reformers had been thrown out of office and Russia's kleptocracy had revealed itself!
NEW YORK – When it comes to economic reform, China’s leaders no longer believe that time is on their side.
With a new sense of urgency, President Xi Jinping and his inner circle are attempting one of the most ambitious economic and social-policy reform plans in history.
For China to reach the next stage of its development, a much larger share of Chinese-made products now destined for Europe, America, and Japan must be sold to consumers inside China.
This shift will require a big increase in local purchasing power – and, therefore, an enormous transfer of wealth from large domestic companies to Chinese households.
In addition, China’s leaders appear to be on the verge of approving 12 new regional free-trade zones, which will drive competition and efficiency on a new scale in many economic sectors.
They also recognize the need for further liberalization of the country’s financial system, a move that will require tolerance for outright defaults on bad loans – and the anxiety and anger that comes with them.
Here, as in other areas of the reform plan, change is dangerous; but Xi has come to believe that pressing ahead is vitally important if China is to take the next crucial steps toward building a middle-class, digital-age economy.
Moreover, the reforms are crucial for the Chinese Communist Party’s long-term hold on power.
The leadership will also try to increase state-owned enterprises’ efficiency by withholding support (and money) from those that underperform, potentially putting large numbers of workers out on the streets.
And the government’s steps to tackle China’s heavily polluted air and water, a problem that officials can no longer ignore or explain away, will weigh on short-term growth as well.
In the past, the CCP has responded to slowing growth with a surge in state spending meant to create jobs and keep the system humming.
This time, the authorities are allowing growth to slow at a measured pace, partly because the slowdown is a precondition for the kind of growth that does not depend on the state, and partly because the slowdown helps sustain demand for reform.
To accomplish these goals, Xi is centralizing power, launching a charm offensive, and cracking down on official corruption and extravagance.
He is also using anti-corruption and reeducation efforts to intimidate (real and potential) reform opponents within the CCP.
Finally, the leadership has created new party institutions, answerable directly to top officials, to ensure that all changes are implemented as planned.
Nonetheless, while the reforms are crucial for China’s future, they are certain to produce a backlash.
Some of the losers have the means to defend their interests: purged officials, companies, and industries that face new regulatory scrutiny, as well as firms forced out of business, have well-placed friends within China’s enormous bureaucracy.
Moreover, free-trade zones bring greater competition, including from foreign firms, which raises risks of increased unemployment and capital flight.
China’s leaders have long feared publicly visible divisions within the elite, given the risk that infighting could expose sensitive secrets.
Xi’s proposed reforms are just the sort of changes that might have this effect.
With hundreds of millions of Chinese now online, and other twenty-first-century communication tools available to an unprecedented number of citizens, ideas and information cross China’s internal and external borders with unprecedented ease and speed.
In response, the CCP continues to develop new technologies to stifle or redirect dissent; but the battle for control of China’s public discourse is not one that the country’s leaders can win every day for the foreseeable future, and they know it.
The authorities appear confident that they can manage the risks generated by a gradually slowing economy.
But early signals suggest that if trouble develops, the party will choose a crackdown over concessions, and there is no guarantee that party unity will hold in such a scenario.
For outsiders, the reform process also poses risks that extend well beyond the global economic fallout of a sharp Chinese slowdown.
If reforms become broadly unpopular or expose dangerous divisions within the leadership, the government will have good reason to divert public attention from controversies at home by picking fights abroad.
Frictions between China and the Philippines, Vietnam, and others in the South China Sea persist, but confrontations with Japan, including over territorial disputes in the East China Sea, are more likely to cause the most damage.
No one in power in either country wants a war, but diplomatic dust-ups between China and Japan, the world’s second and third largest economies, respectively, have already taken a toll on their commercial relations.
In particular, Japanese companies operating in China have sustained significant reputational and financial damage during recent episodes of trouble between the two governments.
At such a delicate time internally, China would gain nothing from antagonizing the US.
But trouble with US allies, particularly Japan, could draw the US into a fight that it would strongly prefer to avoid.
In short, China is on the brink of large, necessary, and dangerous transformations that promise to change the country for the better – or make everything, including regional stability, much worse.
The International Monetary Fund should be an essential port of call for emerging-market and developing countries facing financing needs.
With its ability to mobilize large financial resources and buttress policy credibility, the IMF can help mitigate the large economic and social costs often associated with crises.
Against this background, the world has come together in the midst of the crisis to radically overhaul the framework for IMF lending.
Now and in the future, the world needs the IMF to respond flexibly and effectively to its members’ needs.
First and foremost, our financing packages should be large enough relative to the size of the problem to make a difference.
In addition, the absence of an IMF insurance facility with acceptable terms has been a major gap in the global financial architecture, especially for the more dynamic emerging-market economies.
This is despite all the evidence of the value of early access to IMF financing, before a tough situation deteriorates into a crisis.
Moreover, while it remains essential to attach policy conditions to IMF-supported programs, they should be focused squarely on solving a country’s critical problems, so that the conditions will be relevant rather than intrusive.
With our members’ support, we are implementing important reforms to our lending policies that will encourage countries to approach the IMF early on, before crises become severe and almost intractable.
First, policy conditions associated with future IMF lending will be better tailored to country circumstances.
A new Flexible Credit Line makes high-volume financing available – even before a crisis has struck – without any ex post policy conditionality to qualifying countries with strong economic fundamentals and policy frameworks.
Some observers have dubbed the new facility “EZ loan,” though few countries meeting the qualifying criteria would consider their policy achievements – and their commitment to maintaining that record – anything but “easy.”
For others, conditionality will be more tightly focused on core areas, and “structural” conditions that require hard-to-time legislative measures will be judged in a less formalistic manner.
Second, for those not qualifying for the new instrument, the Fund’s workhorse lending facility, the Stand-By Arrangement, will be made more flexible along several dimensions.
These include permitting high financial access even before a crisis materializes, and allowing disbursements to be more front-loaded.
Normal limits on access to IMF resources are being doubled – a development consistent with the growing consensus that the Fund’s lending capacity needs to be at least doubled given the severity of this crisis.
This is extremely important, since few things are as fatal to the credibility of a policy package as insufficient financing.
Taken together, these steps address the core problems – the stigma associated in the past with IMF conditionality, the availability of early pre-crisis financing, and the overall size of rescue packages – that have sometimes diminished the effectiveness of the Fund’s role as a crisis lender.
Emerging markets that approach the IMF early on for pre-crisis financing will find shelter from the winds of global deleveraging, which in turn will help contain the spread of the crisis.
The IMF has already moved quickly to help many of our member countries in this time of crisis, including by protecting social spending in order to cushion the impact of the crisis on the most vulnerable.
The lending reforms adopted this week will enable us to be even more flexible and responsive in assisting even more countries.
At the same time, these reforms are only a part of a much larger plan for IMF renewal.
Still in the pipeline are initiatives to increase concessional lending to low-income countries hit by the crisis, to strengthen the Fund’s surveillance and early warning capacity, and to improve its governance structure in ways that recognize the larger role of emerging-market countries in the world economy.
It is my hope that further action in all these areas will be taken in the coming months.
Together, they constitute a turning point in the way the IMF works, and will allow it to serve its global membership even better.
SEOUL – A vast revolution in military affairs is taking place across East Asia.
The latest signs are Chinese President Xi Jinping’s purge of General Xu Caihou, an ex-Politburo member and former vice-chairman of the Central Military Commission, on charges of corruption, and Japan’s “reinterpretation” of Article 9 of its constitution to permit the country to provide military aid to its allies.
Despite the rising regional tensions that inspired these moves, China’s relations with its neighbors and the United States are not fated to lead to direct confrontation.
But the relentless march of new initiatives to meet the perceived “China threat” will require the region’s political leaders, including the Chinese, to address their disputes in new and more creative ways if that outcome is to be avoided.
In general, there are three ways to foster international peace: deepening economic interdependence, promoting democracy, and building international institutions.
Unfortunately, because East Asia’s political leaders have failed to pursue the latter objective, they now find themselves playing dangerous balance-of-power games reminiscent of Europe a century ago.
Deepening economic interdependence in the wake of Asia’s 1997 financial crisis has not generated political momentum for peace and cooperation.
The region’s business leaders have been unable to prevent deteriorating foreign relations from harming their interests.
By contrast, military lobbying now deeply influences foreign and defense policies – witness China’s double-digit increase in defense spending and rising US arms sales in the region.
International-relations theorists since Immanuel Kant have held that democracies rarely (if ever) fight one another; as a result, political leaders, such as US President Woodrow Wilson, have tried to promote democracy as a means to spread peace.
Until recently, the US seemed to have assumed that China’s engagement with Western democracies would bolster peaceful ties.
But, since the 2008 financial crisis, China’s confidence in its authoritarian development model has grown stronger.
Its leaders now increasingly appear to believe that a new “Beijing Consensus” of mercantilism and state intervention has replaced the old “Washington Consensus” of free trade and deregulation.
China’s ideological incompatibility with the US thus is making the shift in their relative power difficult to achieve peacefully.
In the late nineteenth century, a rising US was able to cooperate with a declining Britain, owing to their shared culture and values.
China’s leaders, however, tend to suspect that the US is deliberately trying to undermine their country’s political stability by questioning its record on human rights and political freedoms.
Meanwhile, Xi’s domestic policies seem to be taking the country ever further from Western norms.
It is this ideological divide that is undermining the development in East Asia of institutions that establish principles, rules, and decision-making procedures for the region.
While much of the West is bound together by institutions like the Organization for Security Cooperation in Europe and NATO, East Asia’s main body, the ASEAN Regional Forum, is too weak to play an analogous role, leaving the region beset with unregulated rivalries.
So far, US and East Asian leaders have done little beyond offering rhetorical support for the creation of multilateral security institutions.
With the exception of the almost defunct six-party talks aimed at eliminating the nuclear threat posed by North Korea, Asia’s powers refuse to be constrained by international rules or norms.
Unfortunately, unlike Europe’s nineteenth-century political masterminds – figures like Talleyrand, Metternich, Bismarck, and Disraeli – who crafted durable international alliances, Asia lacks leaders willing and able to look beyond their narrow national interests.
For example, China’s leaders seem to believe that the 2008 economic crisis and the high costs of two foreign wars have left the US in no position to exercise international leadership.
That may explain China’s recent foreign-policy assertiveness, particularly in its dispute with Japan over control of the Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, which could be intended to probe the strength of the US-Japan alliance.
Testing US power in this way could prove to be a dangerous miscalculation.
Just as Britain refused to concede naval supremacy to Germany a century ago, the US will not easily accept any Chinese challenge to its strategic position in the western Pacific, especially given that so many East Asian states are pleading for US protection.
Despite their economic interdependence and some 90 inter-governmental channels for bilateral dialogue, the two superpowers are caught in a perilous tug-of-war over interests in the East and South China Seas and the western Pacific.
Sino-Japanese relations are particularly fraught, with two decades of economic stagnation in Japan and rapid growth in China fueling nationalist overreaction on both sides.
Having become accustomed to outsourcing its security to the US, and despite having the world’s third-largest economy, Japan neglected to develop its own constructive diplomatic vision.
It remains to be seen whether Abe’s constitutional reinterpretation, cloaked in the language of regional cooperation, advances such a new vision.
It does not help that the US wants Japan to shoulder more of the burden of maintaining Asia’s security, a position that may make sense strategically and financially, but that betrays a lack of understanding of the political context.
The US seems to underestimate regional concerns over Japan’s potential remilitarization.
By providing Japan with a diplomatic carte blanche, the US may find itself hostage to Japanese interests, with the result that Japan becomes part of Asia’s security problem, not part of its solution.
Serious efforts and far-reaching compromises are needed to begin the process of building institutions for regional security cooperation.
Otherwise, the much-heralded “Asian century,” far from bringing economic prosperity and peace, will be an age of suspicion and peril.
SAINT-MARTIN-LAGUÉPIE – Here’s a confession: I don’t lie in bed at night missing mainstream politics.
Instead, I am spending a week at my house in southwest France, walking around the countryside.
The early autumn sun is warm on my back, the trees are starting to change color, and local farmers are preparing for this year’s grape harvest.
On the left and right – few mainstream leaders are having such a good year.
In France, President François Hollande looks like damaged goods as he prepares for next spring’s election.
The French economy benefits from high productivity potential and a well-educated work force, but trade unionists and other members of Hollande’s Socialist Party are blocking measures that would restore strong growth.
Meanwhile, former President Nicolas Sarkozy and former Prime Minister Alain Juppé are vying for control of the center-right opposition in order to challenge Hollande and head off Marine Le Pen of the far-right National Front.
Opinion polls indicate that there will be a second-round run-off between Le Pen and either Sarkozy or Juppé, which means that those on the left will have to choose a conventional right-wing candidate if they want to beat Le Pen.
She is unlikely to win; but, then again, that’s what most people said about the United Kingdom’s vote in June to leave the European Union and Donald Trump’s campaign in the United States for the Republican Party’s presidential nomination.
In Germany, Chancellor Angela Merkel – Europe’s foremost politician – has attracted voters’ ire, owing to her principled policy to welcome refugees.
The opposition Left Party is barely credible as an electoral force; but the far-right Alternative for Germany has been exploiting anti-immigrant sentiments and chipping away at the support of the government parties (Merkel’s Christian Democrats and the center-left Social Democrats) in subnational elections, including in Merkel’s home state of Mecklenburg-West Pomerania.
In Italy, Prime Minister Matteo Renzi is flailing as he tries to kick a flatlining economy into gear.
The center-right opposition, a shifting firmament led by former Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, is lost in the political wilderness, and his main opponents are now the populist Five Star Movement and regional politicians who offer little more than disdain for the national political establishment.
In Spain, Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy of the center-right People’s Party is struggling to form a government after the opposition Spanish Socialist Workers’ Party refused to support him, while Catalan separatists continue to beat the drum for independence.
In the UK, where older, alienated working- and middle-class voters (mainly in England) pushed through Brexit, the new prime minister, Theresa May, is fighting to hold her party together.
Some cabinet members are pushing for a complete break from Europe – a so-called hard Brexit – while others press more sensibly for a middle-ground approach to maintain trade with the biggest market for British goods and services.
As these examples indicate, populists are resurgent across Europe – even in unlikely places like Sweden and the Netherlands.
Now that Trump would feel quite at home almost anywhere on the continent, it is imperative to respond to the pan-Western anti-establishment rage that he represents.
To be sure, slow economic growth in the years since the 2008 global financial crisis has sapped voters’ enthusiasm for traditional parties fighting over the middle ground.
Governing parties on the left and the right have generally agreed on issues such as international cooperation, free trade, public spending, and tax cuts.
While Ronald Reagan, today’s Republican patron saint, was a big-government spender, Democrat Bill Clinton cut welfare entitlements and balanced the budget.
Today’s populists, however, demand simple – indeed, simplistic – answers outside the scope of mainstream consensus.
They blame globalization for damaging their livelihoods and economic prospects, and they seek an enemy – some “other” – whom they can vilify for the uncertainty and downward mobility they have experienced.
There can be no middle way; on the contrary, searching for consensus or accommodation is tantamount to treachery.
Through bluster and demagogy, populist politicians are turning back the clock to a pre-empirical world, in which superstition and obscurantism were apparently better for everyone.
But how do we deal with the reality that so many voters prefer fiction to fact?
We certainly should not give up on democracy, or side with those in the West who, like Trump, admire and seek to emulate Russian President Vladimir Putin’s demi-tyrant vision.
Their shoddy arguments must be rebuked point by point, and their fugues of outrage must be met with calm, rational deliberation.
It is no less important to address the causes of economic alienation, which means, for starters, providing better public services for disadvantaged communities, and investing in education, technology, and high-wage, high-skill jobs.
If we run away from populists, or try to copy their tactics and arguments, we will further undermine the social contract underpinning Western democracies.
They will need to adopt a fighting spirit and signal confidence in their cause, rather than succumbing to complacency or resigning themselves to a long-drawn-out retreat.
And, unless they ensure that public resources are not stolen, and that public power is not used for private gain, they will remain poor, right?
Here, after all, is a narrative that neatly aligns the promise of prosperity with the struggle against injustice.
As Pope Francis said on his recent trip to Latin America: “corruption is the moth, the gangrene of a people.”
The corrupt deserve to be “tied to a rock and cast into the sea.”
Probably the best measure of corruption is the World Bank’s Control of Corruption Indicator, which has been published since 1996 for over 180 countries.
The CCI shows that while rich countries tend to be less corrupt than poor ones, countries that are relatively less corrupt, for their level of development, such as Ghana, Costa Rica, or Denmark, do not grow any faster than others.
Nor do countries that improve in their CCI score, such as Zambia, Macedonia, Uruguay, or New Zealand, grow faster.
By contrast, the World Bank’s Government Effectiveness Indicator suggests that countries that, given their income level, have relatively effective governments or improve their performance, do tend to grow faster.
For some reason – probably related to the nature of what NYU’s Jonathan Haidt calls our “righteous minds” – our moral sentiments are strongly related to feelings of empathy in the face of harm and unfairness.
We are more enthusiastic to fight the bad – say, hunger and poverty – than to fight for, say, the kind of growth and development that makes food and sustainable livelihoods plentiful.
Sometimes switching from the “bad” to the corresponding “good” is simply a matter of semantics: to fight against racism is to fight for nondiscrimination.
But, in the case of corruption, which is a bad that is caused by the absence of a good, attacking the bad is very different from creating the good.
The good is a capable state: a bureaucracy that can protect the country and its people, keep the peace, enforce rules and contracts, provide infrastructure and social services, regulate economic activity, credibly enter into inter-temporal obligations, and tax society to pay for it all.
It is the absence of a capable state that causes corruption (the inability to prevent public officials, often in collusion with other members of society, from subverting decision-making for private gain), as well as poverty and backwardness.
Some might argue that reducing corruption entails the creation of a capable state; the good is created out of the fight against the bad.
Teachers and nurses often do not show up for work, but that does not mean that performance would improve much if they did.
Policemen may stop asking for bribes, but that will not make them any better at catching criminals and preventing crime.
Curtailing side-payments does not imply the ability to manage concession contracts or collect taxes.
Aside from prosecuting some bad apples, measures to fight corruption typically involve reforming procurement rules, public financial-management systems, and anti-corruption legislation.
The underlying assumption is that the new rules, unlike the previous rules, will be enforced.
In 2009, under pressure from the aid community, the government enacted what was billed at the time as the best anti-corruption legislation in the world; and yet all corruption indicators have continued to worsen.
My colleague at Harvard, Matt Andrews, has documented the failure of public financial management reforms designed to prevent graft.
They can create this perception by actually performing the function for which they were created, which is difficult.
Alternatively, they can borrow from the natural world a strategy called isomorphic mimicry: just as non-poisonous snakes evolve to resemble a poisonous species, organizations can make themselves look like institutions in other places that are perceived as legitimate.
And this is what the anti-corruption agenda often ends up stimulating: the creation of organizations that are more obsessed with abiding by the new and burdensome processes than they are with achieving their stated goals.
As Harvard’s Lant Pritchett, Michael Woolcock, and Andrews argue, when inept organizations adopt “best practices” such as financial management systems and procurement rules, they become too distracted by decision-distorting protocols to do what they were established to do.
As Francis Fukuyama has pointed out, the development of a capable state that is accountable and ruled by law is one of the crowning achievements of human civilization.
It involves the creation of a shared sense of “us,” an imagined community on whose behalf the state acts.
This is not an easy task when societies are deeply divided by ethnicity, religion, or social status.
What is to prevent the ethnic group currently in power from diverting resources to itself on the argument that “it’s our turn to eat?”
Why shouldn’t those currently in control of the state transform it into their patrimony, as in Venezuela, where, more than two years after former President Hugo Chávez’s death, his daughters still occupy the presidential residence?
The fight against corruption mobilizes all of us because we want to do away with evil and injustice.
But we should remember that casting the bad into the sea does not imply the sudden appearance on our shores of the good that we need.
HONG KONG – Building and maintaining the infrastructure of property rights – the rules, laws, registers, and administrative and judicial structures that define, protect, and enforce such rights and regulate economic transactions – has traditionally been the responsibility of national governments.
But, as the world economy has become increasingly interconnected, a global property-rights infrastructure (PRI) has emerged – further raising the stakes of developing effective national PRIs and accurate price-discovery mechanisms.
The global PRI has arisen through countries’ widespread accession to the World Trade Organization, international accounting and regulatory criteria like the Basel Accords, standards established by the International Organization of Securities Commissions, and some aspects of international law.
As national economies and multinational companies compete for market share, global standards of market behavior become increasingly important.
Consider the smart-phone industry, in which corporations like Apple, Samsung, Sony, Nokia, and Huawei compete fiercely to secure their global market shares.
Given that companies cannot compete effectively in global markets without a sound domestic PRI, such firm-level competition has driven countries to improve the national PRI over the longer term.
Furthermore, establishing accurate asset-price levels is essential to a well-functioning market.
The state affects asset prices indirectly through its influence on inflation, interest rates, and the strength of the currency.
Governments can directly influence the prices of key resources like energy, money, and public goods and services through taxation, customs duties, production quotas, and natural-resource ownership.
Government intervention in benchmark prices can be justified in the name of macroeconomic management or regulatory action to improve the provision of public goods and services.
After all, the state determines the supply of fiat money and is responsible for energy and natural-resource conservation.
The government (the visible hand) sets the benchmark price for risk-free financial assets through monetary policy and control over fiscal deficits, while the market (the invisible hand) sets the risk premia of risky assets above the benchmark rate.
But the system rests on the assumption that the government will set accurate benchmark interest rates for risk-free assets.
As the recent crises in advanced countries demonstrated, this is not a safe assumption: Unsustainable public debt and fiscal deficits forced central banks to expand their balance sheets massively, causing benchmark rates to turn negative in real (inflation-adjusted) terms.
In fact, lowering the benchmark rates for risk-free assets changes the distribution of the risk premia on risky assets, making it too low when asset bubbles are forming and too high when they burst.
This pattern was evident in the 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis, the 2008 global financial crisis, and the eurozone crisis that erupted in 2010.
The logic and the mechanism that the government uses to set benchmark prices are very different from those that the market uses to set risk premia.
The former implements policy decisions, based on economic, social, and political considerations, while profit-maximizing behavior – anchored by the state-determined price and requiring a robust PRI – determines the latter.
Thus, the role of the market in price discovery is inextricable from that of the government.
Indeed, there is a complex, non-linear feedback relationship between the two, so developing an accurate capital-pricing system depends on both actors.
Until recently, advanced-country markets predominated in setting risk premia, owing to their mature and well-functioning PRIs, which include clear rules and a high level of transparency in price formation.
But, even in advanced countries, the influence of vested interests can lead to collective-action failures and, in turn, to incorrect benchmark rates.
Last year’s LIBOR scandal, in which banks were found to be reporting inaccurate interest rates in order to manipulate the prices of financial instruments, epitomized this risk.
Meanwhile, given that many emerging economies have incomplete or immature PRIs, their influence over market-price discovery is relatively weak.
In state-dominated systems like China’s, developing an effective PRI – delineating market participants’ rights and responsibilities, ensuring the exchange platform’s transparency, and creating a fair and equitable process of dispute resolution – is particularly challenging, because the state acts as a regulator, asset owner, enterprise operator, and competitor in the market.
But setting the correct rate for risk-free assets is difficult when capital flows easily across borders, enabling market participants to exploit discrepancies between countries’ rates.
Herein lies the dilemma (one that China currently faces) of market-oriented reforms.
While cross-border capital flows and interest and exchange rates must be liberalized to maintain economic development, such reforms raise the risk of asset bubbles if implemented under distorted benchmark prices.
Emerging economies have watched the leveraged power of investors distort the price-formation process in crisis-stricken advanced economies.
Preventing this from occurring in emerging economies requires that these countries’ leaders balance monetary, fiscal, and macro-prudential policies in a way that enables correct pricing of risk-free assets.
Striking this balance is made even more complicated by the influence of advanced-country policies on emerging economies.
Exceptionally low interest rates and quantitative easing may be appropriate for advanced economies experiencing slow growth, but they can be problematic for emerging economies struggling to promote market-oriented price-discovery mechanisms.
In this environment, it may be appropriate to strengthen the global PRI further.
CHICAGO – Little political enthusiasm exists for further support to the banking sector.
One reason is that banks that received money in the initial rescues do not seem to have increased their lending, without which monetary and fiscal stimulus are unlikely to be effective.
One possibility is that they worry about borrowers’ credit risk, though this would have to be extremely high to justify the complete cessation of long-term lending.
A second possibility is that banks worry about having enough resources to meet their own creditors’ demands if they lock up funds in long-term loans.
But the many central bank lending facilities that have been opened around the world should assuage these concerns, especially for large and well-capitalized banks.
On the other hand, perhaps banks’ reluctance to lend reflects a fear of being short of funds if investment opportunities get even better.
Citicorp CEO Vikram Pandit said as much when he indicated that it was cheaper to buy loans on the market than to make them.
Consider, for example, the real possibility that a large indebted financial institution faces a run on its deposits, as Lehman did, and starts dumping loans onto the market.
Not only will those loans’ price fall if only a few entities have the spare funds to buy them, but other distressed entities’ scramble to borrow also will make it hard for any institution without funds to obtain them.
Anticipating the prospect of such future fire sales (of loans, financial assets, or institutions), it is understandable that even strong banks will restrict their lending to very short maturities, and their investments to extremely liquid securities.
Some distressed banks clearly possess large quantities of mortgage-backed securities, and are holding onto them in the hope that their prices will rise in the future, saving them from failure.
While there is a price today that reflects those expectations, it is not a price at which distressed banks want to sell.
As a result, there is an overhang of illiquid financial institutions, whose holdings could be unloaded if they run into difficulties.
For others, low prices would be a tremendous buying opportunity, whose prospective return far exceeds returns from lending today.
Any voluntary resumption of lending will necessitate reducing both fears and potential opportunities.
First, the authorities can offer to buy illiquid assets through auctions and house them in a government entity, much as was envisaged in America’s original Troubled Asset Relief Program.
This can reverse a freeze in the market caused by distressed entities that are unwilling to sell at prevailing market prices.
The fact that the government is willing to buy in the future (and now) should raise prices today, because it reduces the possibility of low prices in a future fire sale.
Moreover, once a sufficient number of distressed entities sell their assets, prices will rise simply because there is no longer a potential overhang of future fire sales.
Both effects can lead to increased trade in illiquid assets today, and unlock lending, though this outcome may require significant government outlays.
A second approach is to have the government ensure the stability of significant parts of the financial system that hold illiquid assets by recapitalizing regulated entities that have a realistic possibility of survival, and merging or closing those that do not.
For those entities that are closed down, this would mean moving illiquid assets into a holding entity that would gradually sell them off.
One problem is that the public’s appetite for a bailout of the unregulated and hemorrhaging “shadow” financial system, consisting of institutions like hedge funds and private equity firms, is rightly small, yet it too can serve to hold back bank lending if a large proportion of the distressed assets are held in weak institutions there.
Perhaps, therefore, a mix of the two approaches can work best, with the authorities buying illiquid assets, which can help even unregulated entities, even while cleaning up the regulated financial sector, focusing particularly on entities that are likely to become distressed.
This differs substantially from the current approach (in which well-capitalized entities are given even more capital), which does not deal with the overhang of illiquid assets that more distressed entities hold.
Unless the regulated financial system is systematically audited, with weak entities stabilized through capital injections, asset purchases, or mergers, or liquidated quickly, the overhang of distressed institutions will persist, constraining lending.
One lesson from Japan’s experience in the 1990’s is that the sooner the authorities bite the bullet and clean up the financial system, the sooner the economy will be on the road to recovery.
The longer officials remain paralyzed, hoping that the financial system will right itself, the higher the eventual cost of the cleanup will be.
The United States is gripped by the most bizarre presidential primary campaign in living memory, with populist outsiders threatening to topple established party machines.
Europeans trace their malaise to a democratic deficit in the European Union.
And, in the United Kingdom, the vision of recovered national sovereignty is fueling the campaign to leave the EU.
But efforts to restore the “power of the people” can easily end up turning the people against each other.
As a complex issue is boiled down to a binary choice, that choice becomes existential – a potential source of deep long-term divisions.
But there is no escape from complexity in the British campaign; it simply reemerges in the uncertainty surrounding what a vote for either camp would actually mean.
Remaining in the EU could mean retaining a “semi-detached” status, and perhaps seeking more exemptions and opt-outs from common rules – the course that Prime Minister David Cameron would seem to prefer.
But it could also mean trying to address on a collective basis a broad range of issues – from security to refugees to economics – that, as pro-EU campaigners point out, the UK cannot resolve on its own.
The implications of voting to leave the EU (“Brexit”) are even more obscure.
What would happen if the UK were to embark on the two-year exit process mandated by the Treaty of Lisbon?
Could it work in the existing European Economic Area (the so-called Norwegian solution)?
Or should it pursue a host of bilateral agreements (the “Swiss solution”)?
What about – as Michael Gove, Cameron’s justice minister, has suggested – establishing a free-trade zone with Bosnia, Ukraine, and Albania (the “Albanian model”)?
Should the UK engage in negotiations for the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership as a separate partner?
Could the UK reasonably put its faith in rapid global progress in dismantling tariff barriers?
Negotiating the details of Britain’s relationship with Europe, whatever the outcome, will take years; but ameliorating the polarization caused by the referendum will take even longer.
For countries like Switzerland, which practice true direct democracy, referenda do not tend to produce deep polarization.
Because they occur very often, winning coalitions shift over time and from issue to issue, which means that no single vote leaves deep cleavages in the electorate.
But in representative democracies like the UK (and nearly all other democracies today), voters choose leaders to weigh up complex arguments and make tradeoffs.
When a decision is deemed so vital that it cannot be trusted to the representatives, the principle that underlies the entire political order is challenged.
Moreover, it takes on a momentous quality, fueling intense opposition between sides.
Indeed, the deep polarization resulting from the Brexit referendum recalls previous episodes that shook up political allegiances and broke up old friendships.
The most recent analogy in the UK is the Suez Crisis of 1956, which turned into a debate about postwar Britain’s role in the world and the extent of its dependence on American goodwill.
In the nineteenth century, there was an intense debate over free trade in grain, which culminated in Prime Minister Robert Peel’s repeal of the Corn Laws.
Fifty years later, France was torn apart by the prosecution of army captain Alfred Dreyfus for treason.
In each of these defining political debates, each side has demonized the other, claiming that the opponent is driven by malice or ignorance.
Britons who want to stay in the EU are derided as slaves to an unaccountable international technocratic bureaucracy, traitors to their country who can win only by unleashing “project fear.”
Meanwhile, advocates of continued EU membership portray their opponents as obscurantist, ill-educated, know-nothing little Englanders, driven solely by anger and fear.
In other words, each side argues that the other is incapable of tempering emotion with rational thought.
The reality is that all of the EU-related questions spurring anger and fear among Britons today could be addressed on a case-by-case basis.
In response to concerns that migrants will strain education, housing, or transport, one might make the case for better schools, more planning permission, or increased infrastructure investment.
In all of these areas, elected representatives are well-placed to adjudicate the trade-offs required.
By turning to the mechanisms of direct democracy, Britain has undermined its capacity to address the challenges it faces in a manner that promotes stability.
An all-or-nothing situation is driving citizens increasingly to view politics in terms that the German legal philosopher (and Nazi party member) Carl Schmitt considered inevitable: the distinction between friend and enemy – between those for whom one is ultimately willing to die and those whom one is ultimately willing to kill.
Such divisions can be bridged only by the passage of (a lot of) time.
They can endure beyond the circumstances that gave rise to them, often taking several generations to fade away.
For example, Mediterranean Europe is still wracked by debates about the power of the Catholic Church, just as the American South continues to bear the legacy of slavery and the Civil War.
The result is social tensions, political blockage, and an inability to reform or modernize.
By calling a referendum, Britain has introduced a deep and fundamental conflict into its political sphere.
It is now in real danger of becoming an irreconcilably divided and increasingly stalemated society.
PRINCETON – Populist economics has rarely had it so good.
The US economy is roaring, the stock market is soaring, and the Trump administration’s protectionism has apparently had a negligible impact on growth.
Trump’s dictum that “trade wars are good” even seems to be catching on politically, confounding some of his critics.
They still insist that tariffs are undesirable in general, but they now concede that such measures could be appropriate and useful to stymie China’s rise.
A similar picture has emerged in Europe, where Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán and Poland’s de facto leader, Jarosław Kaczyński, are riding high on the back of full employment and labor shortages.
Under these conditions, one of the populists’ strongest arguments is simply to point out that all the warnings by the globalist elite, Davos cosmopolitans, neoliberals, and one-percenters about the dangers of populist economics were baloney.
The British Remainers behind “Project Fear” overstated the costs of Brexit; the UK economy has not collapsed after all.
But, of course, it is only a question of when, not if, the economic reckoning will come.
Populism is not only about promises to give more to more people; but, without those promises, all of the cultural elements of populism would look merely outdated and reactionary.
And even reactionaries do not like reactionary politics if it hurts them in their wallets.
In the United States, the midterm congressional elections in November will be decided by whether enthusiasm about the state of the economy is strong enough to compensate for the widespread disapproval of Trump’s personal style and divisive, sexist, and racist rhetoric.
Classical economic liberalism assumes that bad policies will be punished immediately by bad outcomes.
Over the past 25 years, bond-market vigilantes have argued that all-seeing, forward-looking financial markets will always anticipate the future consequences of populist policies and impose risk premia.
According to this logic, as borrowing costs rise, populist governments will not be able to deliver on their rash promises, and sanity and orthodoxy will eventually return.
Economists who study populism generally draw lessons from Latin America, where past episodes of nationalist over-promising have quickly led to massive fiscal deficits that could not be financed.
In these cases, populist economics always produced cycles of inflation, currency depreciation, and instability, because global financial markets and other outsiders were skeptical from the start.
Bond markets are not as predictable as many seem to believe; nor can they be relied on as an ultimate source of discipline.
Like markets generally, bond markets can be captured by a popular narrative (or what might euphemistically be called the management of expectations) that overstates the prospects of a certain outcome.
Like today, the interwar period had liberals who predicted that the unconventional response to the Great Depression would end tragically, only to be exposed as purveyors of falsehood when their prophecies did not immediately come to pass.
The Nazis did not miss an opportunity to boast about how quickly their programs had wiped out unemployment and built new infrastructure.
With the German government keeping inflation in check through extensive price and wage controls, there was much talk about an economic miracle.
The Nazis’ apparent success in defying economic orthodoxy looked to many conventionally minded analysts like an illusion.
Critics outside Germany saw only a deeply immoral polity pursuing a project that was doomed to fail.
They were right about the immorality, of course; but they were wrong about the imminence of the project’s economic collapse.
In 1939, the Cambridge University economist Claude Guillebaud published The Economic Recovery of Germany, which argued that the German economy was quite robust and would not collapse from overstrain or overheating in the event of a military conflict.
The Economist, that bastion of classical liberalism, pilloried him in an unprecedented two-page review, concluding that not even the chief Nazi propagandist Joseph Goebbels could have improved on his interpretation.
His work, the editors lamented, was emblematic of a “dangerous tendency among democratic economists to play the Nazis’ game.”
Guillebaud was also excoriated by other academics who were far more famous than him, such as the British economist Dennis Robertson.
And yet Guillebaud was fundamentally right: Nazi Germany was not an economy on the brink of collapse, and the Western powers would have done well to start mobilizing a proper defense.
The record of populist economics in Europe is neither particularly bad nor particularly outstanding.
More to the point, today’s populists have benefited from a general recovery that began before they arrived on the scene.
When the next downturn comes, they will quickly find that their own reckless policies have severely constrained their ability to respond.
At that point, Orbán, Kaczyński, and other Central European populists may decide to pursue more aggressive options.
If populism had an avatar, it would be the immortal cartoon character Wile E. Coyote, who, in his futile pursuit of the Road Runner, routinely sprints over cliff edges and continues to move forward, suspended by the logic of his own belief.
Eventually, he realizes that there is no ground beneath his feet, and he falls.
In the 1990s, when Russia was feeling the pinch of economic reforms, the Russian political provocateur Vladimir Zhirinovsky asked, “Why should we inflict suffering on ourselves?
When things start to go wrong, the only way forward is at the expense of others.
As in the past, when the illusion of today’s painless economic expansion ends, politics will return to the fore, and trade wars may lead to troop deployments.
After WWII ended, it took a few years before new European structures emerged, but they fell into place between 1948 and 1950.
When the Cold War ended abruptly in 1989, elements of a new order were slow to materialize.
If it looks more like make than break, it will nevertheless be a close call.
Chances are strong that NATO and the EU will begin to open themselves to the new democracies in Eastern Europe.
Simultaneously, elements for a new relationship between Russia and NATO are emerging, as well as a new structure for the Atlantic Alliance that assures continuing US involvement through a greater European willingness to shoulder part of the security burden.
And for the EU, depressed under a cloud of Euro-scepticism, 1997 could mean the breakthrough to a confident and enterprising Union by providing its most ambitious project to date -- monetary union and a common currency.
In mid-June, members of the EU plan to sign a new treaty to give greater cohesion to their cooperation, thus making the Union ready for negotiations with those countries that want to join.
In July, the heads of the 18 NATO governments will invite Poland, Hungary and the Czech Republic to join the Western Alliance, with others to follow.
By then a new division of labor between the US and Europe should be worked out, enhancing European responsibility for low-level conflicts in and around the continent.
To make sure NATO enlargement will not lead to a new European divide, an institutional link between Russia and NATO could be in place.
Fiscal and economic performance during the year will provide the basis for that decision, to be taken in early 1998, with monetary union beginning January 1, 1999.
While a summit in Madrid will signal NATO’s opening to the East, it is not clear what steps will follow and when.
Negotiations with the first three aspirants will have to be ratified both by them and by NATO’s’s sixteen parliaments.
Turkey, a long-standing NATO member of increasing strategic importance has made her consent for opening NATO dependent on herself being admitted to the EU.
The clock is ticking: if the Madrid Summit takes place with an agreement between NATO and Russia for closer consultation and cooperation, enlargement could lead to major irritations in Moscow, possibly to deliberate anti-Western action and pressure on Russia’s neighbors.
That is why Western governments are keen to reach an understanding with President Yeltsin.
Can they do so -- and will Yeltsin be in able to push it through at home?
At best it is unlikely to be before 2005 that the first East European country will take its seat in Brussels.
Which countries will qualify remains to be seen but it is clear that without Germany and France there will be no monetary union.
Both countries face major political and financial difficulties caused by high unemployment and low growth.
Neither can spend its way out of crisis if they want to meet the qualification targets, and public patience with the governments of President Chirac and Chancellor Kohl, both committed to monetary union, is strained.
Imagine NATO dissuaded from accepting new members: the loss of credibility, the most important asset of any alliance, would be enormous.
Russia would feel emboldened to get her way by threats and nyets.
The countries to Russia’s west could tumble in into protracted turbulence in their domestic politics and external relationships.
The alliance between Europe an America would have lost the chance to define a new role for itself in post-Cold War Europe and be in danger of falling apart.
Or imagine Russia refusing to respond positively to NATO’s offer of a cooperative relationship: she would be the first to suffer.
It would isolate her from Europe, undermining the international links she has woven over the past decade as well as prospects for successful internal reform.
If the EU should fail to reform its internal structures and or admit those countries it has promised membership, domestic stability in these countries and the Union’s international standing will be damaged.
The United States, in the past a staunch supporter of European integration, would likely adopt a policy of bilateral special relationships with individual European states.
To the outside world as to its own citizens, the EU would look like a selfish, introspective club.
And if the commitment to introduce monetary union and a common currency is broken, the backlash could deal a fatal blow to European integration.
But if monetary union succeeds, it will give to the European project the strong foundation it has lacked.
By setting deadlines for these decisions, NATO and EU governments increased the costs of failure and heightened their commitment.
They will need all the courage and commitment they can muster to honor the pledges they have made to the world.
The great prize of success will be a European order of stability, order and cooperation.
And that is why, despite all the obstacles, the odds still favor success.
PARIS – “One must Europeanize the Balkans, in order to avoid the Balkanization of Europe.”
I wrote those words with the French political scientist Jacques Rupnik in 1991, just as war was breaking out among Yugoslavia’s successor states.
The fighting would last until the end of the decade, claim thousands of lives, and twice require the intervention of NATO (in Bosnia in 1995 and Serbia in 1999).
Nearly a quarter-century later, the Balkans continue to constitute a threat to European peace, just as they did on the eve of World War I and at the end of the Cold War, when Yugoslavia’s implosion led not only to Europe’s first war since 1945, but also to the return of genocidal murder.
The recent fighting in Macedonia, which left eight police officers and 14 Albanian militants dead, raises the specter of renewed violence.
It is difficult to know whether the bloodshed represents the festering of an old, unhealed wound or something new, a backlash against a majority-Slav government that seems bent on embracing ethnic chauvinism.
What is clear is that the region remains an explosive and confused reality, one capable of threatening Europe’s stability, already on a knife’s edge following Russia’s adventurism in Ukraine.
The region is a volatile mix of rising nationalism, deep economic frustration, and disillusionment about progress toward membership in the European Union.
The potential for a plunge into chaos obliges us to consider once again how best to handle the Balkan tinderbox.
When I was in Belgrade recently, the gunplay in Macedonia was the talk of the town.
In particular, they criticized the EU, NATO, and the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe for describing the upsurge in violence as a series of “isolated incidents.”
From the Serbs’ perspective, attacks by Albanian nationalists were more likely the beginning of an attempt to enlarge their territory at the expense of their Christian neighbors, beginning with the weakest.
It is views like these that, along with the violence, risk reinforcing the deep ambivalence within the EU about the prospect of any new enlargement.
The precedent of Greece, hardly a poster child for European accession, seems especially relevant when applied to its northern neighbors, which are similarly plagued with high rates of corruption and unemployment.
And some in the EU are put off by the seeming affinity of the Orthodox Church and its adherents toward Vladimir Putin’s Russia, or by the region’s large Muslim population.
These European apprehensions partly reflect failure by the continent’s leaders to capitalize on the sometimes-spectacular successes of enlargement, Poland being the most notable example.
Instead, the exigencies of domestic politics have induced many European leaders to underscore the difficulties and accentuate the failures of expansion.
With such a cold wind blowing from the West, it is little wonder that Europhilia has begun to give way in places like Belgrade to a pining nostalgia for the Yugoslav era.
“At that time, we were respected,” was how a retired Serbian diplomat put it to me.
“We were one of the Great countries of the Non-Aligned Movement.”
Similar sentiments are evident in Bosnia, and even in Croatia, an EU member since 2013.
During the communist era, Yugoslavia provided a sharp contrast with the Soviet bloc.
Economically and socially, its citizens were far better off than those of Central Europe.
Poland is booming, while Yugoslavia’s successor states (with the exception of Slovenia) are struggling, victims of the unhealed wounds of the distant and recent past – including former Yugoslav and Serbian President Slobodan Milošević’s cynical atavism in winning and maintaining power.
The decision by European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker to abolish the post of Commissioner for Enlargement has been seen as highly symbolic, leaving many in search of an alternative model.
The Russian re-conquest of Crimea provides a gleeful talking point for ultra-nationalist Serbs bemoaning the loss of Albanian-majority Kosovo.
Meanwhile, the Gazprom office in central Belgrade offers a large, visible proof of Russia’s energy presence in the country.
The truth, of course, is that there is no “Russian model” for the Balkans beyond the use of brute force.
Ever-closer ties with Europe remain the best way forward for the region’s residents and the EU alike.
In a time of severe economic crisis, European ideals remain, in spite of everything, the only efficient antidote to virulent nationalism.
For the Balkans, as for the rest of Europe, the EU is the only alternative to a future as bad as the worst of the past.
CAMBRIDGE – The question that still underlies much thinking about economic development is this: What can we do to kick-start economic growth and reduce poverty around the world?
The “we” is sometimes the World Bank, sometimes the United States and other rich countries, and sometimes professors of development economics and their students huddled in a seminar room.
But what has transformed Tunisia, Egypt, and Libya over the last two years has not been efforts by the outside world to improve these societies or their economies, but grassroots social movements intent on changing their countries’ political systems.
It started in Tunisia, where the revolution swept President Zine El Abidine Ben Ali’s repressive regime out of power.
It then spread to Egypt and Libya, ending Hosni Mubarak’s and Muammar el-Qaddafi’s even more repressive and corrupt regimes.
The people who poured into the streets and risked their lives were fed up with the repression and the poverty that these regimes caused.
The average Egyptian’s income level, for example, is just 12% of the average American’s, and Egyptians can expect to die 10 years sooner.
The protesters in Tahrir Square perceived the cause of Egypt’s poverty in its non-responsive, repressive political system, its corrupt government, and the general lack of equality of opportunity in every sphere of their lives.
They saw their current leaders as part of the problem, not part of the solution.
By contrast, most outsiders, asking “What can we do?”, emphasized geographic or cultural factors, or some purely economic “poverty trap,” whose effects should be countered by foreign aid and advice.
There should be no illusion that the transformation that the protesters started will be smooth.
Many previous revolutions have deposed one set of corrupt rulers only to bring in a new bunch who are equally corrupt, vicious, and repressive.
There is also no guarantee that the previous elites will not be able to re-constitute similar regimes.
Indeed, the military, the bulwark of Mubarak’s regime, is now in charge in Egypt, and has been repressing, jailing, and killing protesters who dare to stand up.
Most recently, it has unveiled plans to write a new constitution before the presidential election, and its electoral commission has disqualified 10 of the 23 presidential candidates on flimsy grounds.
And, if the military loosens the reins, the Muslim Brotherhood could take over and form its own authoritarian, non-representative regime.
The genie is out of the bottle, and people know that they have the power to topple governments, and, more generally, that their political activism has consequences.
That is why people have continued to fill Tahrir Square whenever the military has tried to consolidate its power and suppress dissent.
Though it is ultimately the Egyptian people who will decide the country’s fate, and whether it can finally take decisive steps towards more inclusive political institutions, this does not mean that outsiders can do nothing.
In fact, there is much that “we” can do – even if none of it will be central to the outcome.
For example, the US will again give more than $1.5 billion of aid to Egypt this year.
Unfortunately, it is not the people who are trying to change their country’s future, but the Egyptian military and the same politicians who ruled Egypt under the previous regime.
On the contrary, though foreign aid will not by itself transform Egypt’s society or economy, and though some of it will inevitably be wasted and fall into the wrong hands, it can still do some good.
More important, the US and the international community can work to ensure that the bulk of the funds go not to the military and to business-as-usual politicians, but to grassroots causes and groups.
In fact, foreign aid can also be used as a small inducement for national dialogue in Egypt.
For example, foreign aid could be placed under the stewardship of a committee of representatives from different social factions, including the civil-society groups at the center of the uprising and the Muslim Brotherhood, with the clear understanding that if the committee fails to agree, the aid will not be disbursed.
This would force the military and the elites to work together with opposition groups that they often attempt to sideline.
Beyond bringing important but politically marginalized groups to the table, such a committee might also produce a demonstration effect, with successful power-sharing in a small setting possibly encouraging power-sharing writ large.
That may not be the sort of outside intervention that could cure the ills of centuries of repression and underdevelopment overnight, but “we” need to stop searching for a non-existent panacea, and instead do something better than feeding the Egyptian military.
JAKARTA – In recent years, Indonesia has emerged as a robust democracy with a dynamic economy.
Now, as the largest and most influential member of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Indonesia must leverage its newly acquired strength to confront the challenges facing it and its regional partners, while avoiding foreign-policy recklessness.
Less than two decades after the 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis ravaged the economy and provoked a social and political upheaval that ended President Suharto’s three-decade-long rule, Indonesia is a member of the G-20 and boasts the world’s 15th highest GDP.
Moreover, Indonesia’s mainly Muslim population is predominantly moderate, and the country has been able to overcome most of its internal security problems, including the secessionist movement in Aceh and various large-scale communal conflicts.
For example, the country’s reputation as a model of Muslim moderation has recently been undermined by intolerance and violence against religious minorities.
And, after eight years under President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, the country faces elections next year.
Nevertheless, Indonesian leaders’ primary concerns – and ambitions – lie in the country’s foreign relations.
In particular, China’s territorial claims in the South China Sea have divided ASEAN member countries, forcing Indonesia to perform a difficult balancing act as it seeks to maintain stable relations with China while addressing the rift within the region.
Since achieving independence after World War II, Indonesia has pursued a “free and active” foreign policy, preferring to protect its own interests rather than align itself with more powerful countries.
Indonesia’s activist approach, whereby it assumes a leadership role both in the region and globally, has been driven simultaneously by supply (domestic popular sentiment) and demand (the country’s international partners).
Two distinct foreign-policy legacies inform the Indonesian public’s expectations and the government’s choices.
Sukarno, Indonesia’s first president after independence, adopted a confrontational stance, making Indonesia a leader of the Non-Aligned Movement.
But, while this “lighthouse” foreign-policy approach increased Indonesia’s international clout, it led to encirclement by hostile Western powers – and to bankruptcy.
Sukarno’s successor, Suharto, embraced a more pragmatic and low-profile foreign policy aimed at creating an environment in which Indonesia could develop economically.
This included working toward regional stability in Southeast Asia, as well as nurturing relations with the United States, Japan, and key European countries, in order to gain access to external markets, foreign investment, and technical assistance.
But, while Suharto’s approach supported economic progress, critics charged that it betrayed the spirit of the 1945 constitution, which calls for Indonesia to play an active role in fostering world peace.
Seeking to reconcile often-contradictory demands for idealism and pragmatism, Indonesia has once again adopted a more activist approach to foreign policy.
Although some analysts argue that Indonesia has outgrown ASEAN and should chart an independent course, the government has remained firm: ASEAN will remain the cornerstone of its foreign policy.
That stance is driven less by a sense of insecurity than by confidence in “ASEAN centrality” – that is, its member states’ ability to shape the regional order and realize a common destiny on their own terms, without foreign meddling.
Viewing ASEAN as indispensable for managing relations with major powers, Indonesian policymakers believe that the bloc should be ambitious about spreading its code of conduct, and that it should drive initiatives for creating a regional architecture in East Asia.
Given this, Indonesia’s opposition to the idea of an East Asian community – comprising ASEAN, China, Japan, and South Korea – was unsurprising.
Instead, it backed the more inclusive East Asia Summit, which brings together leaders from ASEAN and its eight key partners – China, the United States, Japan, India, Russia, Australia, South Korea, and New Zealand.
Indonesia hopes to create a looser and more pluralistic grouping that would not be dominated by one or more powers, thereby allowing ASEAN to continue to play the central role of convener.
By contrast, Indonesia’s role in the G-20 remains limited, as does its potential to act as a representative for developing countries.
But, unlike the more confrontational BRICS (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa), Indonesia hopes to foster cooperation among developed and developing countries.
It has also sought a leadership role on such strategic global issues as climate change and inter-faith dialogue.
For example, since 2008, it has hosted the annual Bali Democracy Forum, at which representatives of established and aspiring democracies share their experiences.
Such initiatives underscore the global attention focused on Indonesia, a Muslim-majority democracy, in the wake of the Arab Spring.
Indeed, various Arab countries, notably Egypt and Tunisia, are seeking Indonesian leaders’ advice on balancing Islam and politics.
Such efforts have not always been popular with Indonesia’s ASEAN partners, owing to concerns that they breach ASEAN’s rule of non-interference in other countries’ internal affairs.
For example, Indonesian officials have encouraged reform in Myanmar, helped to bring about an end to the border conflict between Thailand and Cambodia, and pushed for democracy and human rights to be enshrined in an ASEAN political and security community.
Ultimately, however, Indonesia’s clout stems from its soft power.
So, while Indonesians may court the global spotlight, their chief concerns should be fostering strong and stable economic growth, stemming domestic religious intolerance, and preserving ASEAN unity in the face of China’s increasingly assertive policy in the region.
Indonesia should not allow its newfound confidence to become foreign-policy arrogance.
SINGAPORE – About a decade ago, at a meeting of South African mayors convened by Lindiwe Hendricks, South Africa’s then-minister of water and environmental affairs, we predicted that an unprecedented water crisis would hit one of the country’s main cities within 15 years, unless water-management practices were improved significantly.
That prediction has now come true, with Cape Town facing a shutdown of its piped water network.
The question now is whether African leaders will allow our other projection – that, within the next 25-30 years, many more of the continent’s cities will be facing similar crises – to materialize.
As the continent’s population has swelled, from about 285 million in 1960 to nearly 1.3 billion today, and urbanization has progressed, the challenge has become increasingly acute.
And these trends are set to intensify: by 2050, the continent’s total population is expected to exceed 2.5 billion, with 55% living in urban environments.
The challenge African countries face may not be unique, but it is, in some ways, unprecedented.
After all, in Western countries, urbanization took place over a much longer period, and against a background of steadily improving economic conditions.
In building effective systems for water and wastewater management, cities had adequate investment funds and the relevant expertise.
As a result, water and wastewater management has often fallen by the wayside, with policymakers focusing on water-related issues only when droughts and floods occur.
The Third World Centre for Water Management estimates that only about 10-12% of Africa’s population has access to adequate domestic and industrial wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal.
Given that the construction of the infrastructure and systems required to meet African cities’ water needs is likely to take some 20-30 years, governments’ sustained commitment is essential.
A key imperative is the development of more environmentally friendly systems for wastewater disposal, as is cleaning bodies of water within and around urban centers that are already heavily contaminated.
Such an effort must be based on a comprehensive approach to assessing water quality that covers a wide range of pollutants – far more than the 10-40 that most African utilities now monitor – with the expectation that new pollutants will be added as they emerge.
Cities like Singapore now regularly monitor 336 water quality parameters to ensure water safety.
To that end, Africa will need access to the relevant expertise, adequate funding, and well-run laboratories – all of which are currently in short supply.
For one thing, official corruption has long undermined investment in the planning, design, and construction of water infrastructure, as well as the effective management of existing infrastructure.
For another, the social value of water – including its central role in many African religions – has long limited governments’ ability to create a viable funding model for water utilities.
Though countries are often eager to trade resources like oil, gas, minerals, timber, and agricultural products, no country in the world sells its water to other countries.
Canada approved the North American Free Trade Agreement only after its parliament confirmed that the agreement would not apply to water in its natural state.
In federal countries like India and Pakistan, even individual provinces refuse to consider giving water to their neighbors.
In 2001, South Africa introduced a “Free Basic Water Policy,” according to which all households, regardless of size or income, receive six kiloliters (1,585 gallons) of water per month at no cost.
And while both water and food are guaranteed in South Africa’s constitution, only water is provided for free.
In most urban centers worldwide, water is free or highly subsidized, and politicians are reluctant to change that.
Singapore’s water price did not rise at all from 2000 to 2016, and Hong Kong’s water prices haven’t changed since 1996, even as the price of everything else has risen.
While water obviously shouldn’t become an expensive luxury good, governments’ reluctance to charge appropriately for it has undermined their ability to invest in water utilities, including proper wastewater collection and treatment.
Far from leveling the playing field, this has made urban water management in most cities less equitable, because the state is unable to provide the necessary services in an efficient, sustainable, or comprehensive way.
When Cape Town’s water network is shut down because reservoirs have become dangerously low – probably on July 9 – residents will have to stand in line at one of 200 water-collection points, in order to collect 25 liters per person per day.
As South Africa’s politicians and media debate the causes of this crisis, they often focus on climate change – a culprit that cannot talk back.
But the fact is that the dismal state of urban water management – exemplified by the fact that 36% of the water in South African cities is either lost due to leakage or not paid for, compared to 3.7% in Tokyo and 8% in Phnom Penh – remains a leading reason for the shutdown.
Solutions have been well known for decades, and the needed technology, expertise, and even funds are available.
What has been missing is political will, sustained public demand, and continuous media scrutiny.
Cape Town’s crisis should serve as a wake-up call for all of Africa.
Unfortunately, like Africa’s water resources, it is most likely to be wasted.
ABUJA – Two-year-old Bintu Mustapha is the human face behind the hidden humanitarian catastrophe now unfolding in northeast Nigeria.
Her body wasted and stomach distended by hunger, Bintu’s life hangs by the nutritional drip inserted in her hand.
Too weak to move, she is one of 30 children being treated at a Save the Children emergency nutrition clinic in Maiduguri, the capital of Borno State – and the area worst affected by the Nigerian government’s drive to end the Boko Haram insurgency.
As aid donors gather in Oslo for a conference aimed at mobilizing support for northeast Nigeria, the stakes could hardly be higher.
For tens of thousands of children like Bintu, this is – literally – a life-or-death moment.
Success in Oslo could bring hope and the prospect of recovery for millions of vulnerable people.
The humanitarian emergency in northeast Nigeria is the country’s most serious since the Biafra famine in the 1960s.
As the Nigerian army has pushed into areas previously controlled by Boko Haram, more than two million people have been displaced.
Huge pockets of previously hidden deprivation are coming into view as the military retakes territory.
Over 14 million people are in urgent need of assistance in the states of Borno, Adamawa, and Yobe alone.
With livelihoods collapsing as farmers flee their lands and the economy declines, that number is set to rise sharply.
High background poverty rates – already in excess of 50% in the northeast – exacerbate the effects of conflict and displacement.
She was carried for two weeks by her mother to the nutrition clinic in Maiduguri from an area recently liberated from Boko Haram.
Almost half a million children are facing the prospect of severe and acute malnutrition, 300,000 of them in Borno alone.
In the absence of an effective response, some 200 children, on average, could die each day this year.
Children born in northeast Nigeria, especially girls, face some of the world’s most limited opportunities for education.
Fewer than half of Borno’s children make it through primary school.
The combination of conflict, destruction of education infrastructure (around 1,200 schools have been destroyed), and Boko Haram’s attacks on schoolchildren – most notoriously with the 2014 abduction of 276 girls from Chibok – has forced half a million students to abandon their studies.
The country has ten million children out of school, more than any other country in the world – and 60% live in the northeast.
Failure to equip these children with the opportunities that come with education will trap them in a cycle of poverty, undermining growth, weakening livelihoods, and creating fertile ground for recruitment by militant organizations.
Last year, aid donors and UN agencies failed spectacularly to act with the urgency the crisis demanded.
Meanwhile, the last Nigerian government, struggling with an economic downturn, failed to mobilize sufficient resources – and it was slow to call for international support.
First, aid donors need to commit now to the $1 billion needed to reach around seven million of those in need.
An effective humanitarian response requires predictable and assured funding to underpin the necessary investments in nutrition, livelihoods and food security.
As one of the conveners of the conference, Germany should be working with other major donors – notably the United Kingdom and the United States – to broaden and deepen humanitarian support.
President Muhammadu Buhari’s government has placed one of its most able ministers, Zainab Ahmed, at the head of the humanitarian response team.
Despite the economic recession, the authorities have also pledged to allocate around $1 billion of humanitarian support for the northeast.
It is critical that it acts on this commitment – and that it puts in place the programs needed to end the region’s persistent marginalization.
Borno’s governor, Kashim Shettima, an Islamic scholar and self-professed beneficiary of what he describes as “Western education,” has made reconstruction of the sector the state’s single largest budget priority this year.
To its credit, the World Bank has also put in place a $100 million facility to support education recovery in Nigeria’s northeast.
Yet UN agencies and donors have effectively scripted education out of the humanitarian appeal.
Given that the denial and destruction of economic opportunity has been at the heart of the insurgency, there is no better way to deliver a peace dividend than to invest in education.
That is why the UN’s special envoy for education, Gordon Brown, has rightly called for the creation of a new global facility to support education in conflict-affected countries.
Ensuring that children like Bintu Mustapha survive is the most immediate priority.
Giving them a chance to thrive through education is the only sound foundation for a lasting peace.
PRAGUE -- In the coming days – perhaps even hours – the destiny of Burma (also known as Myanmar), and the fates of over fifty million Burmese, will be decided.
But nobody knew with any precision just when open revolt against Burma’s military dictatorship would erupt.
I fear that, with only a few exceptions, most countries have been surprised and caught off guard – once again – by the rapid course that events have taken in Burma.
So they seem to be completely unprepared for the crisis and thus at a loss as to what to do.
Worse, however, is the number of countries that find it convenient to avert their eyes and ears from the deathly silence with which this Asian country chooses to present itself to the outside world.
In Burma, the power of educated Buddhist monks – people who are unarmed and peace loving by their very nature – has risen up against the military regime.
That monks are leading the protests is no great surprise to those who have taken a long-term interest in the situation in Burma.
An overwhelming number of Burma’s Buddhist monks have found it difficult to bear the central and regional governments’ efforts to corrupt their monastic orders, and to misuse the example of the monks’ self-restraint to increase the pressure on other believers.
Of course, without universal and coordinated international political, economic, and media support for these brave monks, all development in Burma may quickly be put back nearly 20 years.
On a daily basis, at a great many international and scholarly conferences all over the world, we can hear learned debates about human rights and emotional proclamations in their defense.
So how is it possible that the international community remains incapable of responding effectively to dissuade Burma’s military rulers from escalating the force that they have begun to unleash in Rangoon and its Buddhist temples?
For dozens of years, the international community has been arguing over how it should reform the United Nations so that it can better secure civic and human dignity in the face of conflicts such as those now taking place in Burma or Darfur, Sudan.
It is not the innocent victims of repression who are losing their dignity, but rather the international community, whose failure to act means watching helplessly as the victims are consigned to their fate.
The world’s dictators, of course, know exactly what to make of the international community’s failure of will and inability to coordinate effective measures.
How else can they explain it than as a complete confirmation of the status quo and of their own ability to act with impunity?
BERKELEY – For more than a half-century, the US dollar has been not only America’s currency, but the world’s as well.
It has been the dominant unit used in cross-border transactions and the principal asset held as reserves by central banks and governments.
But, already before the recent debt-ceiling imbroglio, the dollar had begun to lose its luster.
Its share in the identified foreign-exchange reserves of central banks, for example, had fallen to just over 60%, from 70% a decade ago.
The explanation is simple: the United States no longer dominates the world economy to the extent that it did in the past.
It makes sense that the international monetary system should follow the global economy in becoming more multipolar.
Just as the US now has to share the world stage with other economies, the dollar will have to make room for other international currencies.
In my recent book Exorbitant Privilege: The Rise and Fall of the Dollar, I described a future in which the dollar and the euro would be the dominant global currencies.
And, peering ten and more years down the road, I anticipated a potential international role for the Chinese renminbi.
I ruled out a role for Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), the accounting unit issued by the International Monetary Fund.
One might think that the SDR, as a basket of four currencies, might be attractive to central banks and governments seeking to hedge their bets.
But the process for issuing SDRs is cumbersome, and there are no private markets in which they can be traded.
There was no realistic alternative, I concluded, to a future in which the leading national currencies, the dollar and the euro, still dominated international transactions.
What’s different now is that a pox has been cast on both houses.
The US debt-ceiling fiasco has raised doubts in the minds of central bankers about the advisability of holding dollars, while Europe’s failure to resolve its sovereign-debt crisis continues to fuel doubt that the euro can survive.
Once upon a time (less than a year ago), it was possible to imagine international-reserve portfolios dominated by the dollar and euro; today, anxious central bankers are desperate for alternatives to both sick currencies.
Second-tier currencies, like the Swiss franc, the Canadian dollar, and the Australian dollar, are only a slightly larger midget when combined.
With central banks seeking an alternative to dollars and euros, isn’t now a perfect time to expand the role of SDRs?
Isn’t this a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to move away from a world where the US Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank hold the supply of international liquidity in thrall?
This much has not changed in the last year: the SDR still is not an attractive option for central banks disenchanted with the dollar and the euro.
The reason is obvious on a moment’s reflection: the combined share of the dollar and euro approaches 80% of the basket of currencies that comprise the SDR.
Expanding the basket to include emerging-market currencies would help, but only a little, because the US and Europe still account for half of the world economy and more than half of its liquid financial markets.
The SDR would offer little protection if the dollar and euro lost value over time.
A better idea is to start work now on creating a more attractive global reserve asset.
The ideal instrument would be a global-GDP-linked bond, the returns on which would vary with global growth rates, just as returns on the GDP warrants issued by the governments of Costa Rica and Argentina, for example, vary with their national growth rates.
This would enable central banks to hold instruments that behave like a widely diversified global equity portfolio.
They would be compensated for inflation and currency depreciation in the US and Europe, since the payout would depend on these economies’ nominal, not real, GDP.
The IMF could use its bond-issuing power to purchase GDP-indexed bonds from national governments, thereby providing the new global reserve assets with backing and interest-generating capacity, while creating an incentive for governments to issue them.
The Yale University economist Robert Shiller has long argued that national governments should issue GDP-linked bonds as a safer way to borrow, but convincing them has been difficult.
Persuading them to support issuance by the IMF of a global-GDP-indexed bond would be even harder.
But if governments and central banks are serious about identifying alternatives to the dollar and the euro, now is the time to start – and GDP-linked bonds are the place to look.
NICOSIA – It is tempting to see the results of the recent parliamentary elections in northern Cyprus as a blow for the peace process.
Voters in the Turkish Cypriot north rejected the party of their leader, Mehmet Ali Talat, who has been meeting almost weekly for eight months with his Greek Cypriot counterpart, Demetris Christofias, to work out the terms of a settlement to reunify the island.
But the election result has more to do with the dire state of the economy than it does with the peace process.
Voters are feeling the pain of economic isolation, made worse by the global downturn.
While he has lost his parliamentary majority, Talat is still head of the Turkish Cypriot administration and will continue to lead negotiations on behalf of the north.
Both he and Christofias remain committed to finding a solution, despite the difficulties they face.
The election result nonetheless underscores the fact that time is running out to find a solution to the Cyprus problem.
Talat has set the presidential election in early 2010 as a deadline for agreement, while Christofias is not without political challenges within his own coalition.
The sunny climate of the eastern Mediterranean draws a steady stream of tourists, and European Union membership in the south has pushed income levels for Greek Cypriots higher than the EU average.
However, Cyprus remains a conflict zone: there are still fortified streets in Nicosia, a United Nations peacekeeping operation patrols the buffer zone, and there is a substantial Turkish military force in the north.
This is all the more reason to make sure that the energy and courage of Talat and Christofias are not squandered.
These two leaders have limited political capital, and they need more than their own goodwill to succeed.
An overwhelming majority of Cypriots are unhappy with the status quo, believe a settlement is possible, and reject any return to violence, but are deeply distrustful of each other and of the peace process.
A culture of cynicism and complacency seems to be the default position, especially among politicians and the media.
When we visited Cyprus late last year, we noticed how few women and young people were engaged in politics.
Old men (like us) dominate public debate, and we strongly urge Cyprus’s leaders to make more space for those whose voices are not so readily heard.
The island has been split for so long that generations have grown up with no idea of life on the other side.
It is very difficult for schools, law enforcement agencies, soccer clubs, and telephone, electricity, and water companies to cooperate across the Green Line.
Lowering these barriers with respect and sensitivity would help to heal the wounds of the past and, importantly, to build trust.
Researchers already estimate that reunification could raise annual incomes by about €1.8 billion – more than €5,500 per household.
Everyone needs to see that there are benefits to reunification that will simplify life, strengthen the economy, and outweigh the compromises that any settlement will require.
Third, the major regional powers, whose presence hangs heavily over the island, need to play their part.
Greece is urgently called upon to play a more constructive role in the peace process by explaining the benefits of its own normalization of relations with Turkey and its support for that country’s EU membership.
And Turkey could give a tremendous boost to confidence in the peace process by announcing a symbolic withdrawal of some troops from northern Cyprus as a goodwill gesture – a move that would also greatly assist Turkey’s convergence with Europe.
Finally, explicit international expressions of support for a settlement would help to persuade the leaders of both communities that success would bring proper recognition and reward.
It would certainly help if the EU promised substantial development funds, including for resolution of property issues, once an agreement is in place.
This is the best chance in 30 years for a federal settlement in Cyprus, and it may be the last.
If these talks fail, partition will probably be permanent, and, no matter how benign the environment today, geopolitics will catch up with the island over time.
Failure to resolve the Cyprus problem is a potentially serious threat to good relations between NATO, Turkey, and the EU.
Cypriots must seize this chance to build a healthy, reunited country that can make the most of its economic potential in the region, and play its part in world affairs with confidence and security.
JAKARTA – The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) stands at a defining moment.
Its member states are constantly being evaluated for their economic potential and desirability as a market for investments, goods, and services.
At the same time, their effort to forge a community free from external intervention is shaping a new regional order based on common security and shared prosperity.
In geopolitical terms, ASEAN is well-placed to be an acceptable and equal partner to many larger, more powerful economies, such as China, India, Japan, Australia, and South Korea – a part of the world that, for the first time, is leading a global recovery.
ASEAN has also contributed to building one of the most dynamic economic-integration platforms in the world, and now acts as a de facto regional hub of wider economic cooperation and integration.
Indeed, the importance of regional economic integration for global stability and security cannot be understated.
The combined annual GDP of China, Japan, India, and ASEAN is $14.45 trillion, roughly equal to that of the United States, at $14.62 trillion.
More importantly, East Asia’s economies are expected to grow at an average annual rate of 5.1%, compared to 3.2% in the US.
That said, the wide disparities and development gaps between ASEAN members call for a multi-track and multi-speed approach to deepening economic integration.
In anticipation of worsening food and energy security concerns in the future, ASEAN has set priorities for programs that increase productivity and production, strengthen policy coordination on agricultural trade, and boost efforts to alleviate poverty.
East Asia needs to maintain a fine balance of political-security requirements in much the same way.
Continual restructuring and consolidation will be needed to create a balanced regional geopolitical architecture, which must broaden beyond ASEAN members to meet the needs of Japan, the US, Australia, India, China, and Russia – all of which have vital interests in the region.
With the participation of the US and Russia in the expanded East Asia Summit, the regional architecture is, indeed, becoming more dynamic.
Given this, it is imperative that ASEAN becomes pro-active and remains focused on relevant strategic issues.
In engaging the major powers, ASEAN will not shun traditional security issues, such as maritime cooperation, as well as humanitarian assistance and disaster relief.
Japan has been the biggest provider of development assistance and technological know-how to ASEAN for the past four decades.
Indeed, Japan’s investment and aid to Southeast Asia have fueled ASEAN’s economic progress.
I believe that Japan’s strategic role in the region will only increase, because its economy and industrial production chains have been regionally integrated.
Both sides have pledged to forge closer cooperation and initiate new programs to consolidate their relationship.
Nevertheless, unresolved and overlapping maritime and territorial claims remain ASEAN’s biggest challenge.
We believe that maritime cooperation between ASEAN and major powers including China would benefit all countries.
And, as to Myanmar, ASEAN has deferred the decision on its prospective chairmanship in 2014.
At its recent summit, ASEAN leaders asked Myanmar for more clarification about the country’s internal situation.
In doing so, ASEAN showed its continued influence on Myanmar’s progress towards democratic reforms.
Indonesia’s government has expressed support for more proactive engagement with the region’s civil-society organizations, pledging to organize “community conferences or forums” to engage with stakeholders in efforts to strengthen the security, economic, and socio-cultural pillars that support ASEAN as a group.
Indonesia hopes that these community conferences will gradually gain acceptance at the ASEAN level.
Through these efforts, ASEAN is emerging as the fulcrum of geopolitical stability in Asia.
What could have otherwise been a liability – ASEAN's diversity – was transformed into an asset that has set the benchmark for regional integration in a troubled and complex world.
Nevertheless, ASEAN is constantly demonstrating its determination to create a region where no member is left behind, even as we collectively pursue prosperity and an equitable distribution of our burgeoning wealth.
Moreover, ASEAN is seeking to forge a clearer position on key international issues to heighten its standing on world affairs.
Disaster management, peace-keeping operations, and, again, maritime-security cooperation are some of the areas in which ASEAN members can work together to formulate common policy approaches and action plans.
In the years to come, ASEAN will make further progress on unified responses to climate change, human trafficking, and food and energy security.
Of course, as it moves forward, ASEAN will have to make structural and policy adjustments to strengthen its voice.
And the ability to deter and resolve conflicts among its members must remain one of its priorities.
At its recent summit, ASEAN agreed to establish an ASEAN Institute for Peace and Reconciliation that will deal with issues of peace and reconciliation – a milestone achievement for ASEAN.
There will be many more innovative breakthroughs as ASEAN develops into an integrated, open, peaceful, and outward-looking region.
With China's rapid growth increasingly affecting a wide range of issues worldwide, it has become expedient for US presidential candidates to blame China for some of America's domestic problems.
But in this year's US presidential election campaign, China bashing has been virtually non-existent.
Recent US elections rarely spared China, which found itself a frequent target of populist demagoguery.
Its exchange-rate regime, which pegs the Renminbi to the US dollar, was blamed for the mounting US trade deficit.
Never mind that America's bilateral trade deficit with China, even including Hong Kong, accounts for less than one-fifth of the total US deficit: growing imports from China and more direct investment by US companies supposedly fueled US unemployment.
Similarly, the unfinished reforms in China's banking sector and state-owned enterprises have been used as evidence of state subsidies for dumping activities.
Although the majority of China's exports now come from private companies that receive virtually no loans from state banks , American candidates in previous elections routinely sought to curry favor with working class voters by vowing to protect US jobs against China's supposedly unfair business practices.
The jobs issue could be exploited further by citing poor working conditions, low wages, child labor, and other problems commonly found in developing countries.
Attacking a communist country has always seemed to offer American politicians a convenient way to appeal to the average voter.
After all, most US voters can be trusted not to learn how other countries, let alone countries in the Far East, really work.
But this time, George W. Bush and John Kerry both know that it would be unwise to bash China too hard.
American companies and the entire US economy have a huge stake in China now, so both candidates have no interest in rocking the boat.
A candidate may promise more anti-dumping actions against Chinese goods, vow to press harder on China to change its exchange rate regime, or sharpen criticism of China's weak enforcement of intellectual property rights; but over-protectionism may make a candidate look irresponsible in 2004.
Indeed, protectionism can do nothing to reduce America's trade deficit and stanch domestic unemployment.
No matter how much politicians blame others, growing US imports mean greater reliance on international markets, and some China factor in America's investment portfolio is needed to compete against European and Japanese firms.
George W. Bush failed to honor his anti-Chinese protectionist campaign promises of 2000, as did Bill Clinton throughout his presidency.
Any China-bashing and protectionist pleas this time around will most likely ring just as hollow.
Moreover, China's geopolitical importance to the US has grown immensely since the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington D.C. of September 11, 2001.
At least for now, engaging China in the global fight against terrorism is in America's interest.
China does have some common interests in fighting Islamic extremist terrorism, and it did not try to block America's path to the Iraqi war in the UN Security Council.
China has also been cooperating constructively with the US and its allies in dealing with North Korea's nuclear capabilities.
Of course, America still wants to contain China and prevent it from becoming a major regional and world power.
But that remains a long-term strategic goal, not the stuff of presidential campaigns, especially when China seems too weak to pose any immediate threat to the US on any front in the foreseeable future.
China has never been a positive factor in American politics; so, from its perspective, the less it is mentioned in this US election season, the better.
The relative silence about China in the US these days may be due merely to the news dominance of the Iraq War.
Yet it may also indicate that America's political elites are in the process of facing up to new realities and adjusting their view of China accordingly.
NEW DELHI – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has assiduously courted Russian President Vladimir Putin, meeting with him more than a dozen times in four years.
This month he hosted Putin in Tokyo and in his hometown of Nagato (famed for its onsen, or natural hot springs).
But Abe’s courtship has so far yielded little for Japan, and much for Russia.
Abe’s diplomatic overtures to Putin are integral to his broader strategy to position Japan as a counterweight to China, and to rebalance power in Asia, where Japan, Russia, China, and India form a strategic quadrangle.
Abe has already built a close relationship with India, and he sees improved relations with Russia – with which Japan never formally made peace after World War II – as the missing ingredient for a regional power equilibrium.
But Abe’s trust-building efforts with Russia are not aimed only at checking Chinese aggression.
He also wants Russia to return its southernmost Kuril Islands – a resource-rich area known as the Northern Territories in Japan – which the Soviet Union seized just after the United States dropped nuclear bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945.
In exchange, Abe has offered economic aid, investments in Russia’s neglected Far East, and major energy deals.
For starters, Japan is a participant in the US-led sanctions that were imposed on Russia after it annexed Crimea in March 2014.
These sanctions have pushed Russia closer to its traditional rival, China; and Putin has publicly identified the sanctions as a hindrance to concluding a peace treaty with Japan.
In response to Abe’s overtures, Putin has doggedly tried to drive a hard bargain.
Russia has bolstered its defenses on the four disputed islands, and, just prior to this month’s summit, he told the Japanese media that the current territorial arrangement suits Russian interests.
“It’s Japan that thinks that it has a territorial problem with Russia.”
The US-led sanctions regime and low oil prices have battered the Russian economy, which is expected to contract by 0.8% in 2016.
Thus, Putin is more reluctant than ever to offer territorial concessions, lest it tarnish his domestic image as a staunch defender of Russian national interests.
Against this backdrop, it is not surprising that Abe left the recent “onsen summit” with dashed hopes of resolving the territorial dispute, while Putin returned home with 68 new commercial accords.
Many of the new agreements are symbolic, but some are substantive, including deals worth $2.5 billion and an agreement to set up a $1 billion bilateral-investment fund.
Under the latter agreement, Japan and Russia are supposed create a “special framework” for joint economic activities on the disputed islands.
Peter Shelakhaev, a senior Russian official who leads the government’s Far East Investment and Export Agency, has indicated that there are legal hurdles to establishing such a framework, and that Japanese firms doing business on the Kurils would have to pay taxes to Russia.
If Japan did that, however, it would effectively be recognizing Russia’s jurisdiction over the islands.
Abe has thus been denied the legacy that he sought, while Putin has succeeded in easing Russia’s international isolation.
Abe was the first G7 leader to hold a summit with Putin after Russia annexed Crimea, and now Russia has won Japan’s economic cooperation, too.
Japan is the only G7 country that has a territorial dispute with Russia, and it is clearly more eager to reach a deal than the Kremlin is.
While Japan has softened its position, and signaled that it may accept only a partial return of the islands, Russia has grown only more intransigent.
After the recent summit, Abe revealed that Putin now seems to be reneging on a 1956 agreement between Japan and the Soviet Union, which stipulates that the smaller two of the four islands will be returned to Japan after a peace treaty is signed.
As it happens, this year marks the 60th anniversary of that joint declaration, which was widely viewed as a breakthrough at the time.
The Kremlin is now suggesting that its commitment to fulfilling the declaration was conditional on Japan not joining any security alliance against Russia.
And Putin has expressed concerns that the 1960 Japan-US Security Treaty would extend to the disputed islands if they were returned, thus allowing the US to establish a military presence there.
It cannot opt out of the US-led sanctions regime; and it cannot exempt the disputed Kurils from its security treaty with the US, especially now that it has been urging the US to provide an explicit commitment to defend the Japanese-controlled Senkaku Islands, over which China claims sovereignty.
Putin, for his part, appears smugly content with his negotiating position.
Not only did he arrive almost three hours late to the onsen summit, in keeping with his habit of leaving foreign leaders waiting; he also declined a Japanese government gift – a male companion for his native Japanese Akita dog, which Japan gave him in 2012.
There is little hope now that Abe will see tangible returns on the political capital he has invested in cultivating Putin.
US President-elect Donald Trump’s desire to improve relations with Russia may give Abe leeway to continue wooing Putin; but if Russia gets the US in its corner, it won’t need Japan anymore.
GENEVA – The violence that has ravaged Myanmar’s Rakhine State underscores the challenges the country faces on its bumpy road from military rule to democracy.
The country is confronting a deep crisis, and urgent action is desperately needed to prevent further violence and assist the huge numbers of refugees and internally displaced people.
To address the political, socioeconomic, and humanitarian challenges fueled by the crisis, the Advisory Commission on Rakhine State, chaired by Kofi Annan, recommends urgent and sustained action on a number of fronts to prevent violence, maintain peace, and foster reconciliation.
While global attention has rightly focused on how to end the attacks on Muslim Rohingya, many other, more systemic fixes are critical to Myanmar’s long-term stability.
In late August, I was in Naypyidaw, Myanmar’s new capital, with the International Commission on Financing Global Education Opportunity.
The Education Commission, as we are known, was there to present findings from our latest report, The Learning Generation, and to share ideas with the country’s leadership on paying for education and improving outcomes.
We met with Aung San Suu Kyi, the government’s de facto leader, and Myo Thein Gyi, the education minister.
By the end, we agreed on this much: sustaining Myanmar’s political transition hinges on improving its education sector.
To many of Myanmar’s leaders, their country is an economic-power-in-waiting.
Home to some 53 million people, it is rich in minerals, natural gas, and fertile farmland, and it occupies a strategic location between India and China.
Most important, Myanmar is rich in human potential, with a diverse and youthful workforce – the median age is just 28 – ready to take their country forward.
Before military rule was imposed in 1962, Myanmar’s education system was among the best in Asia.
Today, while some children have returned to the classroom, attendance in many parts of the country remains low, and teaching standards poor, contributing to high dropout rates.
In addition to these shortcomings, Myanmar faces severe human challenges, including endemic poverty, poor health indicators, and a lack of basic infrastructure.
Among ASEAN countries, Myanmar has the lowest life expectancy and the second-highest rate of infant and child mortality.
Improving Myanmar’s education system, while tackling its other problems, will not be easy.
Vietnam and South Korea offer inspiring examples of countries that transformed their education systems within a generation.
As former South Korean education minister and commission member Lee Ju-ho noted during our visit, teaching young people to think critically takes time, but the results can have powerful knock-on effects for a country’s knowledge economy.
Aware of these benefits, Myanmar has put education at the heart of its reform agenda.
For example, the government is currently working to encourage instruction in more local languages – more than 100 are spoken in Myanmar – in rural areas.
Moreover, the government has increased its education budget, from just 0.7% of GDP in 2011 to 2.1% of GDP in 2014.
While spending remains far below the regional average of 3.6% of GDP, funding is moving in the right direction.
The government’s recently completed National Education Strategic Plan sets out an ambitious five-year timeline to improve “the knowledge, skills, and competencies” of all its students.
The Advisory Commission on Rakhine State recommends that all communities should have equal access to education.
As Suu Kyi noted during our conversation, education will play an increasingly important role in reducing poverty and promoting peace.
If members of the current generation are to become productive members of society, she noted, they must be trained in cultural and ethical understanding.
During this fraught period of political transition, inclusive education can help promote a peaceful consolidation of democracy.
As the crisis in Rakhine State powerfully illustrates, ethnic and ideological rifts run deep in Myanmar, and accessible, quality education may be the only means by which a common sense of shared identity can be cultivated.
And, of course, better training in basic skills can also ultimately boost economic growth and increase social welfare.
The list of challenges facing Myanmar’s leaders is long, and overcoming most of them will be neither quick nor easy.
But ensuring that no child loses the opportunity to learn must rank near the top of the country’s agenda.
MUNICH – At the World Economic Forum’s recent annual meeting in Davos, I participated in a panel of defense leaders to discuss the future of the military.
The issue we addressed is a critical one: What kind of war should militaries today be preparing to fight?
Governments have a very poor track record when it comes to answering this question.
After the Vietnam War, for example, the United States’ armed forces suppressed what it had learned about counter-insurgency, only to rediscover it the hard way in Iraq and Afghanistan.
America’s military interventions in these countries exemplify another key challenge of modern warfare.
As outgoing US Secretary of Defense Chuck Hagel pointed out in a recent interview, in war, “things can get out of control, and drift and wander” in ways that can cause a military to fall into a more “accelerated” use of force than was initially anticipated.
Against this background, the notion that force alone can transform conflict-riven societies in the Middle East and elsewhere is a dangerous fallacy.
They are simply evolving according to a new “generation” of rules and tactics.
The first generation of modern warfare comprised battles fought with massed manpower, using Napoleonic line and column formations.
The second, which culminated in World War I, was driven by massed firepower, and is expressed in the saying, reportedly coined at the Battle of Verdun in 1916, “artillery conquers, infantry occupies.”
And the third generation – perfected by Germany with the “blitzkrieg” method employed in World War II – emphasized maneuver over force, with militaries using infiltration to bypass the enemy and collapse its force from the rear, rather than attacking frontally.
Fourth-generation warfare takes this decentralized approach one step further, with no definable fronts at all.
Instead, it focuses on the enemy’s society, reaching deep into its territory to destroy political will.
One might even add a fifth generation, in which technologies like drones and offensive cyber tactics allow soldiers to remain a continent away from their civilian targets.
While particular generational delineations are somewhat arbitrary, they reflect an important trend: the blurring of the military front and the civilian rear.
Accelerating this shift is the replacement of interstate war by armed conflict involving non-state actors such as insurgent groups, terrorist networks, militias, and criminal organizations.
Confusing matters further is the overlap among these groups, with some even receiving state support.
The Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia – Latin America’s oldest guerilla group – formed alliances with narcotics cartels.
Some Taliban groups in Afghanistan and elsewhere developed close ties with transnational Al Qaeda terrorists.
The insurgents in eastern Ukraine are fighting alongside Russian troops (bearing no insignias).
Such organizations often take advantage of states that lack the legitimacy or capacity to administer their own territory effectively, launching a mix of political and armed operations that, over time, give them coercive control over local populations.
The result is what General Sir Rupert Smith, a former British commander in Northern Ireland and the Balkans, called “war among the people” – a kind of struggle that is rarely decided on conventional battlefields by traditional armies.
These hybrid wars are fought using a wide variety of weapons – not all of which have firepower.
With cameras in every cell phone and photo-editing software on every computer – not to mention the prevalence of social media – the information contest has become a critical aspect of modern warfare, exemplified in the current wars in Syria and Ukraine.
In hybrid warfare, conventional and unconventional forces, combatants and civilians, physical destruction and information manipulation become thoroughly intertwined.
In Lebanon in 2006, Hezbollah fought Israel through well-trained cells that combined propaganda, conventional military tactics, and rockets launched from densely populated civilian areas, achieving what many in the region considered a political victory.
More recently, Hamas and Israel have conducted air and land operations in the densely populated Gaza Strip.
This kind of warfare emerged largely in response to America’s overwhelming conventional military advantage after the Soviet Union’s collapse, underscored by its victory in the 1991 Iraq War, with only 148 American casualties, and its intervention in the 1999 conflict in Kosovo, in which no American lives were lost.
In the face of this asymmetry, America’s opponents – both state and non-state actors – began to emphasize unconventional tactics.
In China, for example, military planners developed a strategy of “unrestricted warfare” that combines electronic, diplomatic, cyber, terrorist-proxy, economic, and propaganda tools to deceive and exhaust US systems.
As one Chinese military official put it, “the first rule of unrestricted warfare is that there are no rules.”
For their part, terrorist groups, recognizing that they cannot defeat a conventional military in a direct war, attempt to use governments’ own power against them.
With violent theatrics, Osama bin Laden outraged and provoked the US, driving it to overreact in ways that destroyed its credibility, weakened its alliances in the Muslim world, and ultimately exhausted its military – and, in a sense, its society.
The Islamic State is now employing a similar strategy, mixing ruthless military operations with an incendiary social-media campaign, punctuated by photos and videos of brutal executions, including the beheading of US and other Western citizens.
These efforts have mobilized the Islamic State’s enemies, while inspiring a growing number of discontented individuals and groups to self-recruit to its banner.
The US, for its part, must balance continued support for its conventional military forces, which remain an important deterrent in Asia and Europe, with investment in a broad portfolio of alternative capabilities that conflicts in the Middle East require.
At a time of unprecedented change, the US – and other major powers – must be ready for anything.
WARSAW – While many Americans remain transfixed by investigations into Russian meddling in the 2016 US presidential election, Poles are learning that their country may have served as a testing ground for Russia’s efforts.
Russia has long sought to install pro-Kremlin politicians at the highest levels of power in Central and Eastern Europe.
And there is now evidence suggesting that Russian military intelligence agencies are wielding influence in Poland’s Ministry of Defense.
In 2014, when Poland was governed by Civic Platform (PO), it was the only country in Europe that had successfully staved off recession in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis.
During the PO government’s eight years in power, Poland’s GDP grew by almost 25%, while unemployment and the budget deficit fell by almost half.
Despite this strong performance, Jarosław Kaczyński’s Law and Justice (PiS) party resoundingly defeated PO in Poland’s 2015 parliamentary elections.
To understand why, we need to go back to 2013, when Marek Falenta, a shady Polish businessman, hired two waiters to record private conversations in a restaurant frequented by politicians.
These secret recordings fueled a scandal that forced almost all of the PO’s leadership out of government.
Among those who resigned was Marshal of the Sejm Radek Sikorski, the co-author of a European Union initiative designed to strengthen the resilience of certain Eastern European and Eurasian countries to Russian pressure.
PiS politicians also frequented venues where recordings were made, and yet none of their conversations were leaked.
Falenta, it turned out, had owed $26 million to a Russian firm, Kuzbasskaya Toplivnaya Kompaniya, with close ties to Russian President Vladimir Putin.
And while he was eventually convicted for his involvement in the eavesdropping plot, no one else involved in orchestrating the leaks has been identified.
At the same time, similar scandals removed liberal politicians from power in Hungary and Slovakia, which are now ruled by the most pro-Russian governments in the EU.
When the PiS assumed power in 2015, Poland’s foreign and defense policies took a bizarre turn, starting with the appointment of Antoni Macierewicz as Minister of Defense.
Macierewicz, the only PiS politician who acts independently – and sometimes in defiance – of Kaczyński, was also the man behind Poland’s botched 1992 lustration, or political screening, process, which delayed the country’s de-communization efforts.
Many still remember the notorious “Macierewicz List” from that period, which tarred innocent people as communist-era secret-police collaborators.
Under a later government, Macierewicz published a report on Poland’s counterintelligence agency, the Military Information Services, which outed undercover Polish intelligence agents and led to the disbanding of the agency.
While in power, the PiS has started disputes with Poland’s most important European allies: Germany, France, and the European Commission.
In November 2015, it ordered a raid on a NATO-affiliated counterintelligence center that had been established to track Russian intelligence efforts.
Then, Macierewicz’s defense ministry unexpectedly canceled a contract with France for the purchase of 50 Caracal helicopters, leaving Poland without a crucial military capacity to this day.
And earlier this year, Macierewicz fired 90% of the military’s General Staff and 82% of its General Command, and formed a new military force whose leadership consists of pro-Kremlin activists and NATO critics.
Recently, the Polish journalists Tomasz Piątek of Gazeta Wyborcza and Radosław Gruca of Fakt, along with the organization Miasto Jest Nasze (the City Is Ours), have uncovered highly suspicious associations from Macierewicz’s past.
For example, one of Macierewicz’s closest business and political associates after 1989 was Robert Lusnia, later found to have served as an informant both during and after the communist period, his recent handlers most likely being agents of Russia’s Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU) operating in Poland.
Piątek has also delineated “numerous and long-term connections between Macierewicz and Russian gangster and financier Semion Mogilevich and the Russian GRU.”
According to the American investigative journalist Robert I. Friedman, Mogilevich is “the most dangerous mobster in the world,” and is widely known to work closely with the GRU.
Macierewicz’s closest ally in the United States is the US senator-cum-lobbyist Alfonse D’Amato, who supported Trump during the 2016 campaign.
D’Amato’s assistant, Edmund Janniger, served as an adviser to Macierewicz until 2015.
The American press has reported that both D’Amato and Mogilevich have past ties to The Bank of New York Mellon, which extended loans to D’Amato’s Senate campaign in the early 1980s, and allegedly laundered money for Russian organized crime groups in the 1990s.
Today, D’Amato’s firm, Park Strategies, lobbies for the interests of US arms manufacturers Aerojet Rocketdyne and United Technologies at the Kremlin, and it has recently provided services for Poland’s Ministry of Defense under Macierewicz.
Indeed, Macierewicz hired Park Strategies to help with the 2016 NATO summit in Warsaw – a major event for arms makers.
And before Macierewicz canceled the arms contract with France, he met with D’Amato, a lobbyist also for the US arms manufacturer Lockheed Martin.
Afterwards, Macierewicz began calling for the purchase of Lockheed’s Black Hawk helicopters.
In response to these many revelations, Macierewicz decided not to file a civil suit against Piątek, which would have required him to prove the journalist’s findings incorrect.
Instead, he has called for Piątek to be criminally prosecuted for threatening a government official.
But Macierewicz is not the only PiS official under a Russian cloud.
The Guardian recently reported that, “Bartosz Kownacki, a key lieutenant of defense minister Antoni Macierewicz, was a member of a group of Polish international observers during Russia’s 2012 election.”
Kownacki was accompanied on that trip, according to the report, by “Mateusz Piskorski, the founder of a Polish think tank, the European Centre for Geopolitical Analysis (ECGA) who is now in detention in Poland, facing charges of spying for Moscow.”
It is in Putin’s interest to sow discord in the West, especially within the EU, and no one is furthering his aim of EU disintegration more effectively than the current Polish government.
Given its strong economy, Poland could be a powerful ally to France and Germany in a post-Brexit Europe that is working toward deeper integration.
But France and Germany cannot count on Poland so long as Kaczyński and Macierewicz are in charge, behaving toward the EU in ways that benefit only Russia.
Within the last few years, people throughout the world's most advanced economies have become acutely worried about the economic prowess of China, India, and other emerging countries with large low-wage populations.
They fear for their own jobs and for their children's future in a world where they must compete alongside the world's poorest.
I searched the Lexis-Nexis database of English-language newspaper stories around the world that contained all three of the words "outsourcing," "jobs," and "India."
In 1999, Lexis-Nexis produced only 39 stories; by 2003, there were 749 stories.
The results were much the same when I searched "outsourcing," "jobs", and "China."
I found similar growth in the use of these three terms together when I searched in French, German, Italian, and Spanish: 90% of the stories were in 2003 and 2004.
After all, advanced countries have been losing manufacturing jobs to less developed countries for more than fifty years.
One reason is that the expanding development and use of new information technology, notably cell phones and the Internet, shrinks the world and makes competition from abroad more plausible.
In fact, new technologies are probably the most important reason why globalization is advancing at a rapid pace.
Cell phones and the Internet link the minds of many people in different countries effortlessly and efficiently, encouraging trade in intellectual creations.
At the same time, the new information technology makes us more aware that the kinds of jobs that are migrating to India and China are high-quality jobs, the jobs for educated and skilled people.
Over the last fifty years, people in advanced countries have increasingly sought university education and specialized training to protect them from an unforgiving labor market.
Now First-Worlders are uncertain whether even this will protect their economic status.
Increased fear of competition from emerging countries is also a natural consequence of the collapse of the speculative bubble in equities in 2000; stock markets in some countries fell to less than half their peak value.
Once we saw our exaggerated hopes for our investments failing, we began to consider our other sources of income and wealth, only to confront the worldwide economic slowdown that began in 2001.
Increased economic anxiety has, unsurprisingly, fueled increasing unease about foreign competition.
Earlier this year, I surveyed people who recently bought homes in four American cities.
My questionnaire asked: "Do you worry that your (or your household's) ability to earn as much income in future years as you expect might be in danger because of changes in the economy (someone in China competing for your job, a computer replacing your job, etc.)?"
Of 442 respondents, 11% answered, "Yes, I worry a lot," 36% replied, "Yes, I worry a little," and 52% said, "No, I don't worry at all."
Thus, while most respondents said they were not worried, nearly half expressed some worry.
I asked this question of recent homebuyers on the theory that fear of job loss might help explain the remarkable boom in home prices in the US (as well as many other advanced countries).
After all, people who fear losing their jobs may seek greater economic security by investing in real property in their own wealthy country, bidding up prices in the process.
Although 81% of the respondents said fear of job loss had no effect on their decision to buy a house, of those who said it did, the number who said it encouraged home purchase outnumbered those who said it discouraged home purchase by a margin of two to one.
Growing fear of foreign competition ought to explain a lot of things in the future.
People used to feel insulated from economic problems that occurred beyond their country's borders.
Fear of competition from abroad is now fundamental, and will change the political process in advanced and relatively advanced emerging countries throughout the world.
It helps explain the rise of protectionism, and the failure of the WTO trade talks in Cancun last September to improve emerging countries' access to advanced-country markets.
As a professor, I find that my students often ask me for career advice with a different tone than in the past.
What I hear is a fundamental lack of confidence that they will do well in any chosen career.
They want to figure out how they can compete with Chinese or Indian workers who have the same, or better, education.
Despite bravado about American superiority, the students themselves do not seem to feel superior, and wonder if they will be living emerging-country lives of their own in coming years.
The emerging countries are doing nothing more blameworthy than working towards their place as equals alongside advanced countries.
LONDON – I was in Jordan, that beautiful oasis of calm and moderation in a difficult and dangerous neighborhood, when I first heard the news about the murder of two British soldiers and a Catholic policeman by dissident republican terrorists in Northern Ireland.
We had looked out across what Christians call the Holy Land from the Jordanian hills.
What struck me, thinking back to the days I once spent in Northern Ireland, was how both there and here the crucible of so much struggle, bitterness, and bloodshed is very small.
There is an intimacy about the geography of Northern Ireland, Gaza, and the West Bank that makes the violence seem all the more inexplicable and obscene.
Is this violence made inevitable by the clash of cultures, religions, and ethnicities?
Is it programmed into DNA by history, language, and our different ways of meeting our spiritual yearnings?
It was my good fortune to be reading in Jordan a book called On Identity by Amin Maalouf.
It is a brilliant assault on what the author, who is Lebanese, French, Arab and Christian, calls “the panthers” of identity politics.
Maalouf hopes that one day he can call all of the Middle East his homeland, and that his grandson will find his book a strange memento of a time when these arguments had to be put forward.
What is true of identity politics in the Middle East, and in shaping America’s and Europe’s relationship with the Islamic world, is equally true about Northern Ireland.
I spent part of my life working on the problems of terrorism in Northern Ireland, first as a minister in the early 1980’s and, later, chairing the commission that drew up reform for policing and security in the Province as part of the Belfast Peace Agreement.
For centuries, the Protestant and Catholic tribes had intermittently clashed, and over a period of three decades – a time euphemistically known as “the Troubles” – terrorism had claimed more than 3,000 lives and tens of thousands of injuries.
This was an identity clash that had nothing to do with the essential messages of Christianity.
I recall that the first time I visited a hospital in Belfast, the young nurses in the Accident and Emergency Unit had to describe patiently to me the difference between a Protestant and a Catholic knee-capping.
But the Catholics used a shotgun for this brutal punishment, and the Protestants an electric drill.
“That is all for the history books,” we thought, until the recent murders.
At its heart lay a simple proposition: the republicans, who called for and bombed for a United Ireland – hammering together the predominantly Protestant North and the overwhelmingly Catholic South – accepted that constitutional change could come only through the ballot box.
We talked the terrorist IRA and their political wing into the political process and the sharing of power.
In return, the Protestant majority in the north accepted that republicans should not have to accept the symbols of a state to which they felt no loyalty.
Moreover, the police and security forces were to be reorganized so that they were seen to represent the whole community, not primarily its Protestant majority.
Interestingly, the issue of police reform was the only one that the political parties could not resolve by themselves.
So I was called in, together with a group of experts on policing, to sort it out.
Some of the compromises that democrats must occasionally make with one-time terrorists are difficult to stomach.
But the outcome has been the return of normality to the one and a half million people of Northern Ireland.
I do not take an apocalyptic view of what recently happened – tragic though it is for the bereaved families.
In a way, it underlines the importance of what has been achieved in Northern Ireland.
Second, the violence has strengthened the political process, with one-time IRA leaders standing shoulder to shoulder with the police to condemn the murders.
Third, the reformed police service itself has been widely seen as the protector of the whole community, and young Catholics have been encouraged to join it by their priests and bishops.
So did I think of lessons to be learned in the Middle East as I drove from one end of Jordan to the other?
Obviously, there will be no peace in Palestine unless we start to talk to Hamas – a point that President Barack Obama’s special envoy to the region, Senator George Mitchell, will surely appreciate after his experiences as a successful mediator in Northern Ireland.
And, second, we should abandon outdated and wrong-headed notions of identity.
That is perhaps an easy point to recognize for this author, the Catholic grandson of Irish potato famine emigrants who, nevertheless, became a British minister and Britain’s last colonial governor.
BERLIN – There can be little reasonable doubt today that the People’s Republic of China will dominate the world of the twenty-first century.
The country’s rapid economic growth, strategic potential, huge internal market, and enormous investment in infrastructure, education, and research and development, as well as its massive military buildup, will see to that.
This means that, in political and economic terms, we are entering an East and Southeast Asian century.
Lest we forget, the outcome for the world would have been far worse if China’s ascent had failed.
We can foresee the power that will shape its geopolitics, but what values will underlie the exercise of that power?
The official policy of “Four Modernizations” (industrial, agricultural, military, and scientific-technological) that has underpinned China’s rise since the late 1970’s has failed to provide an answer to that question, because the “fifth modernization” – the emergence of democracy and the rule of law – is still missing.
Indeed, political modernization faces massive opposition from the Chinese Communist Party, which has no interest in surrendering its monopoly of power.
Moreover, the transition to a pluralist system that channels, rather than suppresses, political conflict would indeed be risky, though the risk will grow the longer one-party rule (and the endemic corruption that accompanies it) persists.
Ideologically, Chinese leadership’s rejection of human rights, democracy, and the rule of law is based on the contention that these supposedly universal values are a mere stalking horse for Western interests, and that repudiating them should thus be viewed as a matter of self-respect.
China will never again submit to the West militarily, so it should not submit to the West normatively either.
And here we return to the concept of “Asian values,” originally developed in Singapore and Malaysia.
Essentially, the concept has served to justify collectivist-authoritarian rule by aligning it with local tradition and culture, with autonomy defined in terms of otherness – that is, differentiation from the West and its values.
Thus, “Asian values” are not universal norms, but rather a self-preservation strategy harnessed to identity politics.
Given the history of Western colonialism in Asia, the desire to maintain a distinct identity is both legitimate and understandable, as is the belief in many Asian countries – first and foremost China – that the time has come to settle old scores.
But the effort to preserve one’s power, the need for a distinct “Asian” identity, and the desire to settle historical scores will not solve the normative question raised by China’s emergence as the century’s dominant power.
How that question is answered is crucially important, because it will determine the character of a global power, and thus how it deals with other, weaker countries.
A state becomes a world power when its strategic significance and potential give it global reach.
And, as a rule, such states then try to safeguard their interests by imposing their predominance (hegemony), which is a recipe for dangerous conflict if based on coercion rather than cooperation.
The world’s acclimation to a global hegemonic structure – in which world powers guarantee an international order – survived the Cold War.
The Soviet Union wasn’t ideologically anti-Western, because Communism and Socialism were Western inventions, but it was anti-Western in political terms.
And it failed not only for economic reasons, but also because its internal and external behavior was based on compulsion, not consent.
By contrast, the United States’ economic and political model, and that of the West, with its individual rights and open society, proved to be its sharpest weapon in the Cold War.
The US prevailed not because of its military superiority, but because of its soft power, and because its hegemony was based not on coercion (though there was some of that, too), but largely on consent.
While China will not change its ancient and admirable civilization, it owes its re-emergence to its embrace of the contemporary Western model of modernization – the huge achievement of Deng Xiaoping, who put the country on its current path more than three decades ago.
Clearly, national interests, and sometimes pure power, play a part in how the US and other Western countries apply values like human rights, the rule of law, democracy, and pluralism.
But these values are not mere ideological window dressing for Western interests; in fact, they are not that to any significant extent.
They are indeed universal, and all the more so in an era of comprehensive globalization.
The contribution of Asia – and of China, in particular – to the development of this universal set of values is not yet foreseeable, but it will surely come if the “fifth modernization” leads to China’s political transformation.
China’s course as a world power will be determined to a significant extent by the way it confronts this question.
MADRID – It has been exactly 15 years since the start of one of the most fateful episodes of the early twenty-first century: the Iraq War.
After the attacks of September 11, 2001, the French newspaper Le Monde famously declared, “Nous sommes tous Américains” (“We are all Americans”), and even predicted that Russia would become America’s main ally.
But US President George W. Bush’s invasion of Iraq in March 2003 blew that prospect to smithereens.
We now know that the war, in addition to causing many of the Middle East’s current troubles, marked the beginning of the end of America’s post-Cold War hegemony.
We also know that, though it was sold as part of the “war on terror,” the groundwork for the invasion had been laid well before 9/11.
As early as January 1998, the neoconservative Project for a New American Century (PNAC) sent a letter to then-President Bill Clinton urging him to topple Saddam Hussein.
And, after winning the presidency in 2000, Bush declared Iraq one of his top two security priorities.
Not coincidentally, Bush’s administration included ten of the 25 signatories of the PNAC founding statement of principles, including Dick Cheney as vice president and Donald Rumsfeld as secretary of defense.
Soon enough, the Bush administration became obsessed with promoting the idea that Iraq had weapons of mass destruction, despite the absence of any conclusive evidence.
In September 2002, Rumsfeld received a now-declassified intelligence report stating that, “We don’t know with any precision how much we don’t know” about the “status of WMD programs” in Iraq.
In all likelihood, the Middle East would have been spared a great deal of suffering had the United States acted with more caution and rigor, as Hans Blix – the head of the United Nations Monitoring, Verification, and Inspection Commission – had advised.
In May 2003, while aboard the aircraft carrier USS Abraham Lincoln, Bush delivered a speech in front of a banner declaring “Mission Accomplished.”
But if the mission was to free Iraq from terror, reconstruct the country, and enhance security on all levels, it was an absolute failure.
It is generally agreed that the war in Iraq caused many more problems than it resolved.
Prominent US politicians who supported the 2003 invasion – including many Republicans – now admit that it was a mistake, as do a majority of Americans.
But, while the 2003 invasion was a profoundly misguided policy, both in form and in substance, the chaos that consumed Iraq and the rest of the region stem from additional mistakes made by US policymakers after Saddam had been removed from power.
Above all, there was the Bush administration’s “de-Baathification” policy, which sought to eliminate every vestige of Saddam’s neo-Baathist regime.
Iraq is a Shiite-majority country, but Saddam’s political apparatus was dominated by Sunnis, many of whom had acquired deep religious convictions during a period of Islamization in the 1990s.
After being excluded from the reconstruction process, many Sunnis turned to militant sectarianism.
De-Baathification also led to the dismantling of the Iraqi army.
Thousands of military personnel, suddenly deprived of income and status, found new hope in the incipient Salafist Sunni insurgency, led by Al Qaeda in Iraq, the precursor to the Islamic State (ISIS).
The insurgents opposed not just the US occupation, but also its perceived beneficiaries: mainly the Shia majority.
Some ex-Baathists ended up in US detention centers, where abusive practices were widespread.
While interned in centers like Camp Bucca in Southeastern Iraq, ex-Baathists and Salafists commingled, and the military experience of the former fused with the ideological extremism of the latter.
By the time ISIS proclaimed its “caliphate” in 2014, an estimated 17 of its 25 principal commanders – including the group’s leader, Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi – had spent time in US detention centers between 2004 and 2011.
Meanwhile, sectarianism was creating havoc in Iraq’s Shia-led government.
In 2010, the incumbent prime minister, Nouri al-Maliki, was re-elected, though his State of Law Coalition had won fewer seats than the more moderate Iraqi National Movement, led by Ayad Allawi.
Barack Obama’s administration could have weighed in to help Allawi form a government, but instead enabled Maliki – Iran’s preferred choice – to hold onto power.
Maliki’s policies became increasingly personalistic, clientelistic, and polarizing, fueling Salafist jihadism, which had sustained several blows prior to the 2010 election.
The Obama administration’s refusal to back Allawi was a precursor to its premature withdrawal from Iraq at the end of 2011.
Both episodes cleared the way for the jihadist insurgency that was already moving into neighboring Syria.
Less than three years later, the US was forced to return to Iraq; soon thereafter, it also launched an intervention in Syria.
Now, after a long and arduous campaign, ISIS has lost most of the territory it once held in Syria and Iraq.
Depriving ISIS of its territory does not eliminate the ideology that sustains it.
Looking ahead, the hope is that Iraq’s general election in May will deliver a government that is committed to ruling through consensus, maintaining stability, and defending the country’s institutions.
Moreover, the next government will have to reach out to Iraq’s independence-minded Kurds and find a satisfactory way to integrate them into the political process.
For the US, in particular, one of the most important lessons of the past 15 years is that military interventions aimed at regime change will almost always lead to disaster, especially in the absence of a sensible plan for what comes next.
The Iraq War showed that the cost of unilaterally forsaking diplomatic channels can be enormous.
One hopes that the Trump administration – particularly the incoming secretary of state, Mike Pompeo – will heed these lessons as tensions with Iran heat up.
Iran’s growing regional influence owes much to America’s mistakes in Iraq, starting with the abandonment of diplomacy.
A similar US approach to Iran would lead to another generation – or more – of turmoil in the Middle East.
LONDON – It is often assumed that emerging-economy living standards are bound to converge with those in developed countries.
But, leaving aside some oil exporters and the city-states of Hong Kong and Singapore, only three countries – Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan – have come from far behind to achieve per capita GDP of at least 70% of the developed-country average over the last 60 years.
China hopes to do the same, but it faces a distinctive challenge: its sheer size.
Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan depended on export-led growth to catch up with the developed economies.
But China – home to almost 20% of the world population and responsible for 15% of global output – is simply too large to depend solely on external markets.
To reach the next stage of development, it will need to forge a different growth path – and that will require more difficult reforms than those on which attention is often focused.
To be sure, export-led growth has fueled China’s economic rise so far, with its current-account surplus growing to 10% of GDP in 2008.
There simply is not enough import demand in the world to absorb ever-growing Chinese exports.
Before 2008, China’s massive surpluses were matched by unsustainable credit-fueled deficits in developed economies.
When boom turned to bust, falling global demand hit China’s export sector, and threatened to increase unemployment.
In response, China turned to the domestic growth engine of credit-financed investment in infrastructure and real estate.
Since 2008, credit has surged from 125% of GDP to more than 210% of GDP, enabling investment to increase from 42% of GDP to nearly 48% last year.
Across China, concrete was poured into apartment blocks, multilane highways, convention centers, railway stations, and airports.
Real-estate investment now accounts for 15% of China’s GDP, compared to less than 5% in 2000; when related industries like steel and cement are taken into account, that figure rises to one-third of China’s GDP.
Almost 60 million Chinese workers are employed in construction today, up from just below 20 million in 2007.
China’s current growth path stands in stark contrast to that followed by Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan.
When those countries’ per capita GDP stood at current Chinese levels, real estate played only a minor role in their economies; indeed, the sector was often deliberately starved of credit.
True, total capital stock per capita in China still lags far behind that of developed countries.
But a recent International Monetary Fund report reveals the startling fact that China has now surpassed Japan and South Korea in square meters of housing per capita, having reached a level near – or, in some smaller cities, well above – the European average.
As China’s construction frenzy ends, the economy is experiencing a major slowdown.
By some estimates, China’s growth stalled almost completely in the first quarter of this year.
Even official figures indicate that several provinces outside the more dynamic coastal regions are in outright recession.
One is financial: how to deal with the unsustainable debts of many local governments and state-owned enterprises (SOEs).
Local-government debts can be shifted to the central government, or bank loans can be written off and banks recapitalized.
The second, more profound challenge relates to the real economy: how to redeploy workers and capital from the industrial sectors facing overcapacity and the most overbuilt cities.
Hundreds of millions of people, it is said, have yet to migrate to cities, where they will demand housing.
But, given that almost half of China’s rural workers are already over 50 years old, many may never migrate.
Far from being on the cusp of a wave of urbanization, China is within 10-15 years of its completion.
Even if urbanization did continue at a high rate, many workers would not migrate to the second- and third-tier cities where overcapacity is most extreme, but to the major coastal cities.
Though the government can use its hukou (household registration) system to slow that migration, even it cannot direct people to the specific cities with the most excess capacity.
Indeed, this is one rationale for China’s “one belt, one road” initiative, which aims to recreate the ancient overland and maritime Silk Roads connecting China to Europe.
But, as with any export-based strategy, the impact of this approach would be limited by the size of potential external markets, relative to China’s economy.
Domestic consumption, supported by strong wage growth, must instead be the dominant driver of growth.
The good news is that wages are already growing faster than GDP – a trend that is likely to continue, as demographic change restricts the supply of new labor.
Over the next decade, the number of Chinese aged 15-30 will fall by almost 25%.
China must take action to curb overinvestment by SOEs, cutting off such firms’ access to subsidized credit and forcing them to pay much higher dividends to the government.
Those revenues could then be used to improve health services and strengthen the social safety net, thereby removing the need for Chinese households to maintain high precautionary savings.
It is far easier to build consensus around efforts, say, to add the renminbi to the basket of currencies that determines the value of the IMF’s reserve asset, the Special Drawing Right – a move that, while appropriate, would do little for medium-term growth.
But, if China is to replicate the success of Japan, Korea, and Taiwan, there is no alternative to tough reform.
NEW YORK – After being cast out of the White House and Breitbart News, Stephen K. Bannon, often referred to as the mastermind of Donald Trump’s presidential campaign, has vowed to remake Europe.
His organization, called “The Movement” and based in Brussels, aims to unite Europe’s right-wing populists and take down the European Union in its current form.
Bannon sees this effort as part of a “war” between populism and “the party of Davos,” between the white, Christian, patriotic “real people” (in the words of his British supporter, Nigel Farage) and the cosmopolitan globalist elites.
It would seem to be a tall order for this permanently disheveled American media blowhard and promoter of cranky ideas about cyclical cataclysms to change the history of Europe.
Despite meeting such right-wing luminaries as Hungary’s strongman Viktor Orbán, Italy’s Deputy Prime Minister Matteo Salvini, and Boris Johnson, the clownish former British foreign secretary, all of whom wish him well, Bannon has almost no experience in European politics.
He stunned a sympathetic audience in Prague by ranting against “unfair competition” from foreign countries that use cheap labor.
Much of the Czech Republic’s GDP comes from exports, for just that reason.
But the main problem facing Bannon’s effort is that right-wing populist leaders are a disparate bunch.
Bannon himself is a Catholic reactionary with fantasies, fueled by his love of Hollywood heroes, of being a warrior against the forces of evil.
Orbán is an autocrat who exploits popular disillusion with post-communism by blaming immigrants and the EU, even though the Hungarian economy depends on the single market and subsidies from Brussels.
Northern European demagogues, like Geert Wilders, see Islam as the main threat to Western civilization, but defend such causes as gay rights (because Muslims supposedly hate them).
In Britain, Johnson stands for, well, Johnson, but his fellow Brexiteers are less interested in the Islamic threat than in a grandiose version of English nationalism.
France’s National Front, now called the National Rally, is a Le Pen family enterprise trying hard to dissociate itself from its anti-Semitic, Vichyite roots.
As was true of European fascism in the 1920s and 1930s, it is not easy to find much ideological coherence in these various political strands, let alone in Bannon’s Movement.
What they all have in common, however, is reliance on animus, sometimes directed at Muslims, sometimes at any kind of immigrants, very often against the EU, and always against the liberal elites – whom British Prime Minister Theresa May described as “citizens of nowhere.”
There is something conspiratorial about this animus, a notion that the common man is at the mercy of a shadowy network of string-pullers that rules the world.
In the days when Stalin identified enemies of the people as “rootless cosmopolitans” (meaning Jews), the headquarters of this omnipotent global network was thought to be New York, with branch offices in London and Paris.
Immigrants, particularly from Muslim countries, bear the brunt of populist propaganda.
Bannon wrote the first draft of Trump’s so-called Muslim ban, barring immigrants from several predominantly Muslim countries.
The Brexit campaign, led by Johnson, warned British voters that their country would soon be “swamped” by Turkish immigrants, even though Turkey is nowhere close to joining the EU.
But however unpleasant anti-immigrant rhetoric and policies may be, the main target of the populists’ ire remains the sinister globalist elite, represented by George Soros and other liberals whom they accuse of promoting human rights, compassion for refugees, and religious tolerance to further their own interests.
Bannon has actually expressed admiration for Soros, even though he sees him as a kind of Satan.
It might seem ironic that radical nationalists, like Bannon, should be seeking to unite in a global movement, as though they were mimicking their internationalist enemies.
But the populists’ goal is not to destroy elitism; it is to replace the old elites.
Hence the common language of self-pity, as though Orbán, Salvini, Wilders, and the rest were being oppressed by the “Davos Party.”
Often from marginal backgrounds, they feel excluded, insufficiently recognized, even looked down upon.
It is their turn to rule, they believe – and to exact revenge for all the slights they think they have received on the way up.
This is why Donald Trump, the uncouth property developer with a huge chip on his shoulder, is their hero.
But this doesn’t make him an internationalist, any more than jamborees of European right-wing populists make for a coherent international movement.
These are occasions for mutual flattery and strutting in front of the cameras.
Whether the populists can do more than that – collectively bring down the EU and reorder the Western world – is hard to tell.
For example, whereas Trump and Bannon see China as the great global enemy, Orbán has been greedily accepting any Chinese money on offer.
And the English nationalists are driving their country into a not-so-splendid isolation.
A true “nationalist international” can emerge only when such contradictions are addressed.
But wherever the global right ends up, it is unlikely that Bannon’s Movement will be the vehicle that gets it there.
BEIJING – After several months of disappointing economic indicators, China’s State Council has unveiled a “mini-stimulus” package, focused on social-housing construction and railway expansion.
The decision came a month after Premier Li Keqiang’s declaration that China had set its annual growth target at “around 7.5%” – the same as last year’s goal.
The implication is clear: While consumption-driven growth remains a long-term goal for China, infrastructure will continue – at least in the short term – to serve as a key driver of China’s economy.
Of course, China is not the only economy that depends on infrastructure investment to buttress economic growth.
The World Bank estimates that infrastructure investments accounted for nearly half of the acceleration in Sub-Saharan Africa’s economic growth in 2001-2005.
According to the Bank, a 10% increase in infrastructure investment is associated with GDP growth of 1%.
Such investment also creates jobs, both in the short term, by creating demand for materials and labor, and in the long term, for related services.
For example, every $100 million invested in rural road maintenance translates into an estimated 25,000-50,000 job opportunities.
But these benefits are diluted in China, owing to its excessive reliance on public funding.
Indeed, in recent years, less than 0.03% of Chinese infrastructure investment – which amounted to roughly 9% of GDP – was derived from private capital.
This problem is not limited to China; of the 7.2% of GDP that Asian countries spend, on average, on infrastructure development, only about 0.2% is privately funded.
By contrast, in Latin America and the Caribbean, private capital finances, respectively, 1.9% and 1.6% of infrastructure investment.
Discussions within the G-20 have produced two possible explanations for Asian countries’ inability to attract more private capital to infrastructure projects.
Most developing countries argue that the problem is rooted in the provision of capital, with investors preferring to fill their infrastructure portfolios with low-risk projects, and insurance companies and banks facing overly restrictive regulations.
OECD countries like Germany counter that the problem is the lack of investment-worthy assets; there are simply not enough bankable projects available.
It is time for Asia’s leaders to recognize that the lack of private funding for infrastructure projects cannot be reduced to one or even two problems, and to develop comprehensive solutions that account for the full scope of the challenge.
This requires, first and foremost, abandoning the view that infrastructure assets fit into the paradigm of traditional asset classes like equity, debt, or real estate.
Infrastructure must be redefined as a new asset class, based on several considerations.
For starters, there is the public-good element of many infrastructure projects, which demands contingent government obligations like universal coverage levels for basic services.
In order to make such projects more appealing to private investors, economic externalities should be internalized, and a link should be established between the internal rate of return, which matters to a commercial investor, and the economic rate of return, which matters to society.
Moreover, innovative mechanisms to supply new assets to investors would be needed – and that requires the creativity found and priced by markets.
To this end, private-sector sponsors must be given space to initiate valuable projects.
The new asset class would need its own standardized risk/return profile, accounting, for example, for the political risks that public-sector involvement may imply and for the lower returns from infrastructure relative to traditional private equity.
Moreover, the risks associated with the new asset class would change as projects progress from feasibility study to construction to operation, implying that each phase would attract different sources of funding.
A clear understanding of this process would enable potential investors to assess projects more effectively, which is critical to encouraging them to put up financing.
Another important consideration is the considerable technical expertise that infrastructure investments demand, which makes them more complex than most assets.
Similarly, a specialized network of actors would be needed to ensure that intermediation of infrastructure transactions is efficient and cost-effective, instead of fragmented and slow, as it is now.
For countries that lack China’s strong fiscal position, the need to attract private capital to infrastructure investment is obvious.
With nearly 70% of Sub-Saharan Africa’s population lacking access to electricity and 65% of South Asians lacking access to basic sanitation, there is no greater imperative than to plan, fund, build, and maintain infrastructure assets.
But private investment in infrastructure remains vital even in countries like China, because it brings the power and dynamism of the market, which improves the allocation of capital and promotes transparency.
Indeed, more private-sector involvement would make the kind of scandals that have occurred in China’s railway sector far less likely.
In short, redefining infrastructure as a new asset class is the only credible way to attract funding for infrastructure construction, and thus to boost long-term economic growth and the employment rate.
TOKYO – We have all heard the saying, “Sunshine is the best disinfectant.”
Indeed, I believe that a framework under which Asian governments publicly disclose their military budgets needs to be established if we are to build trust and avoid a regional arms race.
More broadly, keeping military expansion in check, enlarging the number of countries that conclude the Arms Trade Treaty, and improving mutual understanding among national defense authorities are now the paramount issues facing Asia.
They should be the focus of the East Asia Summit, which in turn should become the premier forum for taking up regional security issues and ensuring that stability is maintained.
Military expansion is inherently incompatible with Asia’s move toward the center of the global economy.
The fruits of prosperity should be reinvested in improving people’s lives, not in weapons that can take them.
For example, Japan will offer its utmost support for efforts by ASEAN member countries to ensure the security and free navigation of the seas and skies.
We have already provided three new patrol vessels to Indonesia through grant aid cooperation and have decided to provide ten more to the Philippine Coast Guard.
Moreover, we are moving forward with the necessary survey to enable us to provide such vessels to Vietnam.
No less important, when Japan sends hardware, experts and training follow, and we convey our sense of pride in committing ourselves to our duties.
By cultivating a high degree of morale and proficiency, we strengthen the bonds between the peoples of Japan and recipient countries.
In the Philippines, Indonesia, and Malaysia alone, Japan has trained more than 250 coast guard personnel.
In 2012, when we invited senior officials responsible for enforcing maritime law in each of the five major ASEAN countries to a month-long training program, three members of the Japan Coast Guard were assigned to each trainee, with all of them living, eating, and sleeping together under the same roof.
Recently, Japan formulated a new framework for transfers of defense equipment and technology to other countries.
On the basis of appropriate controls and strict inspections, we can now offer rescue, transport, surveillance, and minesweeping equipment.
To support ASEAN countries in safeguarding the seas, Japan will combine various options, including official development assistance, capacity building by the Japan Self-Defense Forces (JSDF), and provision of defense equipment and technology.
That is why it is incumbent upon us in Japan to reconstruct the legal basis for collective self-defense and international cooperation, including participation in United Nations peacekeeping operations – a reform that my administration has begun.
The JSDF is now working to foster peace in South Sudan, under the flag of the UN mission there, alongside units from Cambodia, Mongolia, Bangladesh, India, Nepal, the Republic of Korea, and China, as well as many civilian UN staffers and NGO personnel from various countries.
All are partners with us in assisting South Sudan’s nation-building process.
But imagine now that civilian workers there, powerless to defend themselves, came under sudden attack by armed elements.
Under the approach that Japanese governments have taken up to now, the JSDF would be unable to rescue the civilians.
My government is thinking hard about this dilemma, and close consultation is underway within the ruling coalition.
It is precisely because Japan depends so heavily on the international community for the stability of its external environment that we wish to work even more proactively for world peace.
Many generations of Japanese have walked a single path – that of freedom, human rights, and the rule of law – and we will continue to walk this path for generations to come.
But, as we revitalize Japan’s economy, we need “new” Japanese who shoulder global responsibilities commensurate with their country’s size and economic resources.
They will still loathe poverty, embrace universal values, and find joy in hard work.
If anything has changed, it is that women are much more visible among these new Japanese.
For example, all three of the Japanese judges and public prosecutors who helped draft Cambodia’s civil code were young women.
In August 2011, President Benigno Aquino III of the Philippines and Chairman Murad Ebrahim of the Moro Islamic Liberation Front met in Narita, Japan.
Three months ago, in March, the two sides finally reached a comprehensive peace agreement.
When the new Bangsamoro local government assumes power two years from now, Japanese assistance teams will be there from the start.
Japan is already focusing on giving women in the region the skills they need to earn a living.
In Mindanao, where Japan built a vocational training center for women, the sounds of gunshots and angry cries have been replaced by the whir of sewing machines.
All of this is nothing other than an expression of Japan’s determination to spare no effort for the sake of peace, security, and wider prosperity in the Asia-Pacific region.
By working with our regional allies and partners, including the United States and ASEAN, we will translate that determination into a rock-solid zone of stability.
LONDON – Emmanuel Macron’s election to the French presidency provides the European Union with an opportunity to move past the internal conflicts that have hastened its disintegration.
Rather than standing exclusively with the old elites or the new populists, Macron has promised to rally broad political support under the banner of European reform.
When Macron met with German Chancellor Angela Merkel, he offered a plan for ending the cold war between northern and southern Europe – which is to say the tension between advocates of austerity and those in favor of growth policies.
And when he meets with Russian President Vladimir Putin this week, he could find a way to bridge the divide between the EU’s eastern and western flanks, which want, respectively, to contain and engage Russia.
Likewise, Macron has tried to reconcile the idea of a welcoming Europe with advocacy of a fortress Europe.
He wants to take in more refugees, while urging the EU to create a border force of 5,000 soldiers, and to accelerate repatriation of illegal migrants.
But while many EU leaders were relieved to see Macron elected, it is often because they hope he will give a new lease on life to the old project, rather than a radical break with the past.
To bring true change, Macron will have to transcend the two contradictory but mutually reinforcing political models that have defined the last decade of EU governance: technocracy and populism.
Jean Monnet, the French economist who is considered one of the modern EU’s founders, was renowned for his ability to turn big political conflicts into smaller technical issues.
This method was highly successful during the post-war period of European reconstruction, because it allowed diplomats and officials from different countries to bypass national disagreements or lingering resentments and address the continent’s most pressing problems.
But, over the years, EU policy discussions have departed from Monnet’s model.
They now tend to be disconnected from national politics altogether, driven as much by the logic of EU institutions as by member states’ needs.
Moreover, EU-level decisions have been pickled into rigid codes to which member states must adhere, even if their governments or electorates do not support them.
Together, these trends have fed the widespread perception that there are no alternative forms of EU governance, and that Europe is being run by elites who have little concern for the interests of the people they are supposed to be serving.
The populist explosion in recent years is a natural reaction to this disconnected form of technocracy.
It is no accident that leaders such as Marine Le Pen in France, Geert Wilders in the Netherlands, Viktor Orbán in Hungary, and Nigel Farage in the United Kingdom have all posed as tribunes of the “people.”
Through referenda – their favorite political tool – they have been able to inflict damage to the EU constitutional treaty, the EU-Ukraine Association Agreement, refugee-repatriation deals, and, with the UK’s Brexit vote, the composition of the EU itself.
As European technocrats have pushed for covert integration to resolve the euro and refugee crises, the populists have struck back even harder.
And every time populist-driven referenda against EU treaties force governments to retreat into technocracy, the populist narrative is reinforced.
The UK’s Brexit negotiations have already become a battleground between technocrats and populists, with each side vying for an outcome that will support its narrative.
When British Prime Minister Theresa May says that she wants to “make a success of Brexit,” she sets off alarm bells in Brussels and other European capitals, because such an outcome could inspire populist anti-EU movements elsewhere.
To forestall that scenario, some members of the German government, fearing that they will be unable to accommodate Macron’s other demands (particularly concerning eurozone reforms), are hoping to work with him to make Brexit unattractive.
This also seems to be what EU Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker was getting at recently.
“Brexit will show how much more attractive it is to be a member of our Union,” he said.
“Thanks to Europe, people enjoy the freedom to live, buy, love, and trade across borders.”
It is understandable that European leaders would latch onto Brexit as the one thing EU member states can agree on.
But, unfortunately, the Brexit debate tends to bring out EU elites’ worst instincts, not least because it encourages them to fight for the status quo, rather than for reform and innovation.
If the EU continues to look inward, consumed by the questions posed by Brexit, the next five years will be as sterile and unproductive as the last.
The big question now is whether Europe can accept the lifeline that Macron is offering, and look forward to a new project, rather than backward to old struggles.
To be sure, many observers have poked fun at Macron for refusing to commit himself to one side in any debate.
And satirists have pointed out that he starts almost every sentence with “en meme temps” (at the same time).
But for a long-gridlocked EU, Macron’s proposed grand bargains could offer a valuable way forward – one that relies not on institutional changes, but on political trade-offs.
Macron’s security policies try to square tough anti-terrorism measures with a more humanitarian approach to refugees.
And, given his tough stance on Russia and support for action in Africa and the Mediterranean, he might even be able to rally the EU’s southern and eastern members around a common foreign-policy cause.
If Macron lives up to his promise, he will not stand for technocracy or populism, but for a genuine third way.
But Macron could imbue it with new meaning if he can combine, rather than accept, today’s false choices.
He will have to bridge the EU’s geographic divides, and position himself as pro-European and patriotic, establishment and anti-establishment, open and protectionist, pro-growth and fiscally restrained.
Can Macron’s method allow EU leaders to break the vicious circle of technocracy and populism, and end the paralysis of the last decade?
For the time being, the only certainty is that – to invoke another hackneyed phrase – there is no alternative.
STANFORD – Big changes are underway in the United States, as the country gears up to elect a new president, one-third of the Senate, and the entire House of Representatives this November.
The outcome will have profound consequences for US economic policy, and thus for the global economy.
As it stands, Hillary Clinton remains the frontrunner for the Democratic nomination, though she has not yet pulled away from her socialist opponent, Senator Bernie Sanders.
The bombastic billionaire Donald Trump is leading the Republican field, followed by firebrand Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, Senator Marco Rubio, a talented mainstream conservative from Florida, and, further back, popular Ohio Governor John Kasich and neurosurgeon Ben Carson.
It is impossible to know whether these early trends will hold through the rest of the primaries, now turning to the South and Midwest.
Though Clinton has plenty of weaknesses – voters, especially young people, do not trust her, and she may face legal repercussions for dealing with highly classified information using a private email server when she was Secretary of State – the nasty infighting among Republicans may give her a big advantage in November.
Many Republicans believe that Trump’s nomination would cost them the Senate and the White House.
With so much uncertainty, there are a number of directions that US policy could take in the coming years.
While a lot of attention has been paid to headline-grabbing issues like immigration and national security, American voters are highly concerned about economic issues – concerns that the leading candidates would address in very different ways.
On trade, Trump’s ideas are dangerous and would reverse decades of beneficial bipartisan American leadership in trade liberalization, with large tariffs on foreign imports, such as from China and Mexico.
Clinton has flip-flopped on the issue: She now opposes Canada’s Keystone XL pipeline and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which she promoted as Secretary of State.
Clinton has also inched toward Sanders’s position on financial-system reform, as his attacks on her for taking large donations and speaking fees from Wall Street have clearly struck a chord among young voters.
Confronting the big-bank bogeyman has been a centerpiece of Sanders’ campaign;
The Democrats favor loose monetary policy, low interest rates, and a depreciated dollar.
Republicans also oppose bailouts, but worry about excessively loose monetary policy and too much discretion for the US Federal Reserve outside real emergencies.
By appointing a new Fed Chair (or reappointing Janet Yellen), and possibly other Fed governors, the next president will have an indirect influence on interest rates, exchange rates, and global financial markets.
If inflationary pressures rise – unlikely any time soon, but possible when the global economy gains strength – the Fed’s response will be a key determinant of economic stability.
The candidates also differ enormously in their tax and spending plans – and thus their deficit and debt proposals.
Sanders is proposing about $18 trillion of additional spending over the next decade to cover a single-payer health-care system, infrastructure investment, and “free” (that is, taxpayer-paid) tuition at public colleges.
During that period, he would impose tax hikes of $6.5 trillion, mostly on the “wealthy.”
The catch: Democrats define “wealthy” as an annual household income above $250,000 – roughly the starting salary of an urban couple in their first jobs after law school.
The $11.5 trillion deficit would eventually have to be covered by a gigantic future tax hike.
The Republicans want to lower personal income tax rates and broaden the tax base.
They would reduce America’s corporate-tax rate – the highest in the OECD – to a far more competitive level.
Some propose replacing the current personal and corporate income taxes with a flat tax on consumption.
The Republicans would slow growth in spending in most areas, while increasing defense spending.
Whereas Trump proposes an outsize $10 trillion in tax cuts and Cruz about $9 trillion (statically scored), Rubio and Kasich have offered more economically and arithmetically plausible fiscal plans.
Campaign proposals are, of course, partly aspirational, and will have to be negotiated with Congress.
The empirical evidence suggests that tax cuts are more likely than spending increases to spur growth, and that lower spending is more likely than tax hikes to consolidate budgets effectively.
While past experience indicates that constraining spending growth will not be easy, especially with the aging of the post-1945 baby-boom generation fueling rising health-care and pension costs, many countries – including Canada, the United Kingdom, Sweden, and even the US itself – have managed to do so in recent decades.
Republicans and Democrats differ starkly on reforming exploding entitlement costs, which have unfunded liabilities several times the national debt.
The Republicans – with the exception of Trump, who rejects future Social Security “cuts” – would gradually slow growth, whereas the Democrats propose increasing Social Security benefits.
The next leader of the free world should know that when a ship starts leaking, the first priority is to plug the leak, not open new ones.
Overall, the policies proposed by Sanders and Clinton would take the US closer to a European-style social-welfare state.
But, as Republicans point out, Western Europe’s standard of living is 30% lower than that of the US, on average;
That is why Republican candidates – for the presidency, the House, and the Senate – want to roll back President Barack Obama’s tax and spending increases, expensive health-care reform, and regulatory overreach.
PARIS – If you do not understand what is happening to the eurozone economy, you are not alone.
One day we are told that growth is definitely passé; the next that recovery is on track; and the third that the European Central Bank is considering sending checks to all citizens to boost output and revive inflation.
Since the global financial crisis erupted in 2008, productivity has grown at a snail’s pace.
Oddly, the smartphones’ magic computing power does not seem to offset the slowdown in efficiency gains in manufacturing and standard services.
For almost a decade, annual productivity growth in the advanced economies has been close to 1%, versus 2% previously.
But with no evidence that it will end, policymakers have downgraded their forecasts.
Since 2010, the US Congressional Budget Office has lowered its outlook for productivity growth in the decade to 2020 from 25% to 16%; so has the United Kingdom’s Office for Budget Responsibility, reducing its forecast from 22% to 14% productivity growth.
The surest way to buck this trend is to invest in education, promote innovation, and foster efficiency.
In Europe, especially, a broad array of reforms could contribute to bridging a growing efficiency gap with the US.
The ECB can exhort or incentivize, but it is governments that must act.
In 2015, eurozone output barely exceeded its 2008 level, a dismal performance for which sluggish productivity growth cannot be blamed.
Despite considerable slack in the economy, growth in 2015 was a disappointing 1.5%, and the ECB expects just 1.4% growth this year.
This is far better than the contraction that occurred from 2011 to 2013, but one would expect a growth surge in an economy benefiting from a favorable exchange rate, record-low interest rates and the plunge in oil prices.
Whereas premature consolidation of public budgets was largely responsible for causing a double-dip recession five years ago, fiscal policy has been broadly neutral since 2015.
But such external factors also apply to the UK and Sweden, yet their growth rates are 2-3%.
Despite income growth, households are reluctant to consume and build; and, despite a surge in profits, companies are not inclined to take risks and invest.
This is why reforms that strengthen the economy in the medium term can help in the short term, too.
Another reason is that the past weighs too heavily on the present: because inflation is so low, accumulated debt does not go away and agents are forced to save to pay it down.
Finally, unemployment in parts of the eurozone remains too high for households to regain confidence, while the fiscal stance is not distributed across countries in a way that maximizes growth prospects.
This enduring malaise sustains below-target inflation, which in turn keeps real interest rates too high.
With the economy more fragile than it should be, the ECB has crossed one Rubicon after another in order to spark inflation.
A third question must therefore be asked: What could the eurozone do if confronted with a severe deterioration in the global environment – for example, a precipitous interest-rate hike in the United States or an outright recession in China?
In such a case, private demand would contract; and, with heavily indebted governments keen to avoid being caught off guard by a surge in risk aversion, public demand would not come to the rescue.
The memory of the 2011 sovereign-debt crisis remains fresh, and many officials would refrain from using fiscal policy to prop up the economy.
At the same time, the ECB would have reached the limit of quantitative easing.
But to let a new recession happen after a short and feeble recovery would be regarded by citizens as a major policy failure, which would further weaken support for the euro.
Against this background, the ECB is openly pondering the right response.
In a recent interview, Peter Praet, its chief economist, explicitly noted that “all central banks” can print money and send checks to each and every citizen – a last-resort option known as “helicopter money.”
Because households would spend part of the windfall, a helicopter drop would boost both domestic demand and the price level.
More fundamentally, orthodox economists claim that it would be a quasi-fiscal operation for which the central bank has no explicit mandate.
Its advocates reply that the ECB does have a mandate to keep inflation close to 2%, and that it should consider all options – even highly unconventional ones – to achieve that target.
It is true that a helicopter drop would be functionally equivalent to a direct government transfer to households, financed by central banks’ permanent issuance of money.
So helicopter money, while consistent with the ECB’s price stability mandate, would indeed blur the distinction between monetary and fiscal policies.
Assuming individual governments would not want to spend, the eurozone as an entity could borrow to finance growth-enhancing policies.
A sort of beefed-up Juncker plan (the European Commission president’s scheme to invest €315 billion over three years), based on preselected projects to be activated when the time is right, would provide a significant hedge against the risk of recession.
Such projects could be investments that would help limit global warming, or investments to equip the labor force for the digital economy.
Borrowing would be carried out jointly and should be backed by a dedicated source, either a tax or a defined GDP-based contribution that would enable the eurozone to pay down its debt.
It is not clear whether eurozone-wide borrowing would be easier to contemplate than an ECB-engineered quasi-fiscal transfer.
What is clear is that the eurozone should evaluate these options, because either one might well be needed sooner or later.
LONDON – After the United Kingdom’s unexpected vote to leave the European Union and Donald Trump’s unexpected triumph in the US presidential election last year, you might imagine that Europe’s chancelleries have developed detailed contingency plans for a victory by the far-right National Front’s Marine Le Pen in France’s presidential election.
The thought of President Le Pen is so terrifying, it seems, posing such a threat to the future of Europe, that it remains for many a possibility they dare not entertain, much less plan for.
But that threat is precisely why Europe must address seriously the possibility of her winning, however unlikely it may seem.
There is no doubt that, as President of France, Le Pen could do serious damage to the European project.
She has positioned herself as the antithesis of German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and pledged to leave the EU’s border-free Schengen Area and the eurozone.
As for the EU itself, she promises to follow in the UK’s footsteps, renegotiating the terms of her country’s membership, and then calling a referendum on the agreement.
If the EU rejects the reforms Le Pen demands, she will campaign for a French exit.
Whereas many UK Euroskeptics envision a global Britain trading with the world, Le Pen wants to introduce protectionist policies.
In lieu of openness, Le Pen – who now casts herself as a Gaullist – wants to deepen “great power” relations with Russia and the United States, as she focuses on defending “traditional” Christian values and fighting terror in the context of a multipolar world order.
To support those objectives, Le Pen promises to increase French defense spending to 3% of GDP (the NATO target is 2%), while making it clear to voters that none of that spending would support stabilization missions in Africa.
In this sense, a Le Pen victory would amount to a rupture not just with the European mainstream, but also with France’s strategic orientation over the last few decades.
To be sure, opinion polls still favor the independent centrist Emmanuel Macron in a second-round run-off.
But many fear that Macron’s supporters will not be as inspired as Le Pen’s to turn out to vote.
In fact, in recent months, Le Pen’s popular support has remained rather consistent, with her lead in opinion polls for the first round remaining stable, even as French politics is thrown into upheaval by scandal and mistrust.
This perfect political storm has caused France’s two-party system to fragment into a four-party arrangement and has all but knocked the favorites out of the running, while leaving Le Pen largely unscathed.
The reasons for Le Pen’s rise have as much to do with her reinvention of the National Front as with the external political environment.
She has managed to escape the extreme-right ghetto, with a grand strategy, shaped by her ally Florian Philippot, that aims to broaden the Front’s appeal to key groups that previously avoided it, especially civil servants, women, and Catholics.
As Philippot has advanced this plan, claiming that the National Front is “neither left nor right,” he has also been working to lay the groundwork for a Le Pen-led government.
To this end, he is seeking to build a new political elite to serve in a National Front government and help overcome resistance to the party’s agenda from France’s “deep state.”
And he has been exploring what the president can and cannot do – including calling referenda – without permission from parliament.
Compared to Le Pen and her team, Europe’s leaders seem woefully underprepared.
Of course, with so many unknowns, there is a limit to the plans they can share publicly; indeed, at this stage, specific statements may even prove counterproductive.
But that does not mean that EU leaders should simply warn that a Le Pen victory would spell the end of the EU and leave it at that.
Instead, EU leaders should be considering to what extent they would be able to work around a Le Pen presidency.
Even if she wins, she will struggle to gain a parliamentary majority, meaning that she may well end up in what the French evocatively call cohabitation with a hostile parliament and prime minister.
Would other EU leaders be able to form an informal coalition with those elements of the French government?
Europe’s leaders must also begin thinking about how they should respond to Le Pen’s request to renegotiate the terms of France’s EU membership, and to what extent they should resist her efforts to remove France from the rest of Europe.
Should the European Commission develop its own plans for a French exit from the eurozone and Schengen?
There may even be a case for Europe’s leaders to facilitate France’s withdrawal from the EU, lest Le Pen attempt to dismantle the EU from within, by building alliances with the likes of Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán.
But that is precisely the point: bringing them out into the open demonstrates just how disruptive Le Pen’s victory would be.
Indeed, from the EU’s perspective, a hostile president in France, the country of Jean Monnet, would be far more destructive than Brexit.
If we have learned one thing from the annus horribilis that was 2016, it should be that opinion polls are fallible.
Rather than shut their eyes and hope that, this time, the pollsters are vindicated, the EU should prepare even for the worst-case scenario.
Such plans may never have to be implemented, but Europe’s leaders should make them now, rather than wishing later that they had.
GENEVA – Perhaps investors are becoming inured to the United States’ annual debt-ceiling debacle, now playing out for the third year in a row.
But, as the short-term antics become more routine, the risks of long-term dysfunction become more apparent – a point underscored by the shutdown of the federal government.
The US Congress cannot expect to use the threat of default – that is, a weapon of mass financial destruction – as a normal means of extracting concessions.
Unfortunately, because Obama himself has established a history of making concessions in the face of congressional brinkmanship, the debt-ceiling debate has morphed into more than just a short-term political fight.
Increasingly, the battle over the US government’s debt ceiling reflects a deeper constitutional power struggle between the president and Congress.
This struggle, if left unresolved, could profoundly weaken the government’s ability to make significant economic decisions in the future.
Of course, a breakdown in political civility would hardly make the US unique; all too many countries suffer some degree of political dysfunction.
It would take some doing to match (or exceed) Italy’s record of governmental paralysis.
But if Congress continues to hijack US economic policy, it bodes ill for the economy’s otherwise bright long-term prospects.
At least for now, the rest of the world has seemingly unbounded confidence – reflected in very low borrowing rates – in America’s capacity to put its house (of representatives) in order.
No one can imagine that a country with so many unique economic advantages would risk such a damaging self-inflicted wound as default would cause.
Obama needs to force his Republican opponents to blink, and there is no guarantee that they will.
In the past, it was Obama who blinked, knowing that even if a catastrophic debt default was largely caused by congressional Republicans, he would likely absorb some of the blame in the next election.
Now that re-election is behind him, Obama could be inclined to take more risks, with an eye toward securing his economic legacy.
Despite the federal government’s destructive impulses, the US economy is showing great resilience and looks set to become stronger.
Of course, Obama would love to see this trend continue, as would almost everyone else.
Unfortunately, a US debt default, even a technical one, would have unforeseeable consequences that could threaten the recovery.
Consider what happened when the Federal Reserve misplayed its hand with premature talk of “tapering” its long-term asset purchases.
After months of market volatility, combined with a reassessment of the politics and the economic fundamentals, the Fed backed down.
If the mere suggestion of monetary tightening roils international markets to such an extent, what would a US debt default do to the global economy?
Much of the press coverage has focused on various short-term dislocations from counterproductive sequestration measures, but the real risk is more profound.
Yes, the dollar would remain the world’s main reserve currency even after a gratuitous bout of default; there is simply no good alternative yet – certainly not today’s euro.
But even if the US keeps its reserve-currency franchise, its value could be deeply compromised.
The privilege of issuing the global reserve currency confers enormous advantages on the US, lowering not just the interest rates that the US government pays, but reducing all interest rates that Americans pay.
Most calculations show that the advantage to the US is in excess of $100 billion per year.
There was a time, during the 1800’s, when the United Kingdom enjoyed this “exorbitant privilege” (as Valéry Giscard d’Estaing once famously called it when he served as French President Charles de Gaulle’s finance minister).
But, as foreign capital markets developed, much of the UK’s advantage faded, and had almost disappeared entirely by the start of World War I.
The same, of course, will ultimately happen to the dollar, especially as Asian capital markets grow and deepen.
Even if the dollar long remains king, it will not always be such a powerful monarch.
But an unforced debt default now could dramatically accelerate the process, costing Americans hundreds of billions of dollars in higher interest payments on public and private debt over the coming decades.
The last Republican presidential candidate, Mitt Romney, and his vice-presidential running mate, Paul Ryan, campaigned in 2012 on a program that would likely have added trillions of dollars to the US debt over the next ten years, owing to tax cuts and increased defense spending.
Rather, the debt-ceiling debate is about the size and reach of government.
Yes, the US should worry about its soaring public debt – and about the rising pension and health-care costs that are fueling it.
Despite baseless politically motivated claims to the contrary, the academic research still overwhelmingly suggests that very high debt is a drag on long-term growth.
Of course, Americans should worry just as much about the quality of education and infrastructure – not to mention the natural environment – that they are leaving to future generations.
But, above all, they need to leave a legacy of civil political decision-making.
BERKELEY – A highly trained workforce is a public good, crucial not only to the prosperity of workers themselves, but also to the strength of the entire economy.
And, as with most public goods, the United States has been underinvesting in it for decades, leaving many American workers without the skills they need to get well-paying jobs.
As the American labor market tightens and a growing chorus of companies complains that they cannot find skilled workers, innovative partnerships between governments, employers, and educational institutions are beginning to fill the void.
But effective programs require more than just money; they need employers and educators who can identify the necessary skills, create the structures to teach them, and match trained workers with available jobs.
To be successful in achieving these goals, training programs must keep pace with rapid changes in technology and the consequent evolution in the labor market.
In short, workforce training requires both more investment and more innovation through new kinds of public-private partnerships, degree-granting institutions, and approaches to life-long learning and re-skilling.
Innovative approaches can pop up almost anywhere, and government has a critical role to play in promoting them: rigorously evaluating programs, scaling up those that work, and withdrawing funding from those that do not.
In the US, community colleges provide the first step toward a good job for millions of Americans.
These institutions are especially important for students from less-advantaged backgrounds and for displaced workers seeking new opportunities.
Around the country, community colleges are working with businesses and experimenting with ways to provide practical training for high-demand occupations and to fill specialized needs.
Recognizing their importance, President Barack Obama has proposed making two years of community college tuition-free.
The proposal would benefit the roughly nine million students attending community college at least half-time, making steady progress, and maintaining passing grades.
For every dollar a student pays or gives up to attend school, his or her future income rises by about $4.80.
Community colleges are a classic example of how US states operate as “laboratories of democracy.”
Obama based his proposal in part on the free-tuition programs launched by Tennessee and the city of Chicago.
Drawing on the success of the Tennessee Tech Program, he has also proposed a $200-million federal fund to expand community college programs based on their effectiveness, which is to be measured by employer partnerships, work-based learning opportunities, and student graduation and job placement rates.
Similarly, California, which boasts a long tradition of excellence in public higher education, recently introduced a $50 million fund to foster innovative approaches in the sector, with an emphasis on public-private collaborations that have demonstrated their ability to deliver the skills that employers need.
In addition to traditional tertiary education, training institutions are offering targeted modules, certified by professional industry groups.
The Obama administration, for example, cooperated with an arm of the National Association of Manufacturers to launch a manufacturing skills certification system based on standards established by industry groups.
Numerous collaborations among the public sector, non-profit philanthropies, and businesses are offering innovations in worker education.
For example, Western Governors University, a nonprofit online institution, offers accredited college-degree programs in teaching, nursing, health-care informatics, and business.
It gets financial support from more than 20 corporations and philanthropies, including the Gates Foundation, along with $10 million from the US Department of Education.
Advancement is based not on how long students sit in a classroom, but on their competence in the topics they are studying.
The cost for six months, regardless of how many courses a person takes, is $2,890 (including books and a mentor) – a bargain, compared to most state universities.
The Nanodegree program at AT&T (where I am a board member) is another example.
The program, a collaboration between AT&T and Udacity, a for-profit provider of online courses, offers courses and mini-degrees in specialized fields such as front-end website development.
The program is a component of AT&T’s in-house training program, but it is open to anyone with a broadband connection.
A typical course, the content of which is designed by AT&T and other high-tech companies, costs about $200 a month and takes 6-12 months to complete.
AT&T offers scholarships through partner non-profit institutions and provides paid internships for up to 100 graduates.
LearnUp, a San Francisco startup that has attracted funding from some of the biggest venture capital firms in Silicon Valley, establishes partnerships with employers to offer online training modules that connect job seekers to specific jobs, primarily entry-level positions that do not require college degrees.
Employers foot the bill, with the expectation that LearnUp will help them recruit higher-quality applicants.
And, indeed, once candidates have completed the training, LearnUp helps them to secure interviews with prospective employers, which already includes several large companies.
The California community college system is already working with LearnUp to give students access to the skills required to fill available local jobs.
As these examples illustrate, though workforce training is a public good, no single institution or arm of government has all of the answers concerning how best to provide it.
Collaboration among government agencies, companies and trade associations, educational institutions, and non-profits can give birth to effective strategies that can be scaled with public funding.
Only by working together will they be able to identify the best recipes for success.
MELBOURNE – Shortly before Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin’s assassination by a right-wing Jewish extremist in November 1995, I met him in Tel Aviv.
I was visiting Israel as Australia’s foreign minister to argue the case for rapid implementation of the Oslo peace accords – all the way through to negotiated acceptance of Palestinian statehood.
I concluded my pitch by saying, with perhaps a little more cheek than was appropriate, “But of course I’m preaching to the converted.”
He paused, then said with a little half-smile: “To the committed, not the converted.”
For all his deep emotional attachment to the idea of Israel embracing all of historical Judea and Samaria, Rabin knew that the only way to ensure a democratic Jewish state with viable, secure borders was to accept a Palestinian state alongside it, equally secure and viable.
They would share Jerusalem as a capital, and find a mutually acceptable solution to the enormously sensitive issue of the return of Palestinian refugees.
Rabin’s murder was a catastrophe from which the peace process has never recovered.
No Israeli leader since has shown anything like his far-sighted vision, commitment, and capacity to deliver a negotiated two-state solution.
Ehud Barak and Ehud Olmert came close, but not close enough.
And since then Binyamin Netanyahu has lived down to every expectation of his statesmanship.
His routine capitulation to the demands of the most extreme elements of a manifestly dysfunctional Knesset, and his continuing support of his impossibly divisive and pugnacious foreign minister, Avigdor Lieberman, have earned him little praise at home or abroad.
One need not be naïve or in denial about the Palestinians’ multiple problems and missteps over the years to recognize that most of the recent obstacles to progress have been erected in Israel.
Now, with negotiations at an impasse, settlement building continuing unabated, no end in sight to the never-ending humiliation of occupation, and all other forms of leverage evidently exhausted, the Palestinians are going to the United Nations to seek recognition in some form of their statehood.
They want full UN membership, but – facing inevitable veto of that option by the United States in the Security Council – are willing to accept as a fallback a majority vote by the General Assembly recognizing Palestine as a non-member “observer state,” the status now enjoyed by the Vatican.
Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas and his colleagues know perfectly well that UN recognition by itself will not deliver an end to occupation and the full realization of a sovereign Palestine.
Only negotiated agreement on all of the critical outstanding issues – boundary definition, Jerusalem, security guarantees for Israel, and refugees – can do that.
But they have persisted on this course in the face of a fierce campaign to dissuade them – including threats of Israeli sanctions and a cut-off of financial support to the Palestinian Authority by the US Congress – owing to their wholly understandable lack of confidence that anything will move without some new spark.
Despite frantic efforts by the US and the European Union to find some compromise that would head off a UN vote by kick-starting real negotiations, it is much more probable that, even after a US veto in the Security Council, an early UN General Assembly vote will deliver a strong majority for observer-state status.
The question for Israel and its friends to address is what the downside risks of that outcome really are, and to calibrate their reaction accordingly.
The argument has been made that recognition as a state, even in limited form, will give Palestine the standing that it probably lacks currently to seek prosecutions in the International Criminal Court for alleged violations of international law.
Even if right, it is difficult to see why Israel and its friends should accept that as a make-or-break argument.
The ICC is not a kangaroo court, and allegations without substance can be expected to be treated accordingly.
Of course, its current ideological hostility to Israel’s very existence is a serious issue; but Israel and the West should not compound their grievous mistake of not recognizing the legitimacy of its electoral victory in Gaza by rejecting any Palestinian state in which Hamas plays a governing role.
The more positive argument – as Rabin would certainly have understood – is that it is overwhelmingly in Israel’s own interest to defuse this issue by accepting, once and for all, that Palestinian statehood is an indispensable requirement of its own long-term peace and security.
Indeed, Israel should treat the UN vote as an opportunity for a new start to negotiations, rather than an excuse for renewed confrontation.
Such a constructive outcome has become more urgent than ever, given the Middle East’s new geopolitical realities following the Arab Spring.
Moreover, a perceived change of direction on the Israeli-Palestinian issue would be hugely beneficial for the West in its relations with the Islamic world.
Recent polling to mark the 10th anniversary of the 9/11 attacks has shown alarming persistence of the animosity generated by the interventions in Iraq and Afghanistan.
It is difficult to imagine Israel’s leadership changing course at this stage, and it is probably too late for the Obama administration to escape from the domestic political vice in which it seems pinned on this issue.
And that is exactly where the US, Israel, and its closest friends – including my own country, Australia – will be if they resist the tide of international sentiment in favor of moving now to recognize Palestinian statehood.
An aide to President Vladimir Putin, Igor Shuvalov, said that it was realistic to expect the appearance of a new person whom Putin would consider his potential successor.
Perceptions and assessments of the country’s future often depend heavily on the personality of its leader, his resoluteness, and his intellectual and moral qualities.
Furthermore, Putin himself is interested in preserving uncertainty with regard to his successor for as long as possible.
By doing so, he avoids the damage to his authority that would be caused by becoming a “lame duck,” particularly given Russia’s servile bureaucracy and its lack of reliable institutions and respected traditions to carry out a smooth transfer of power.
Finally, different clans around the president have long been trying to promote their own candidates for succession.
Statements similar to Shuvalov’s have already been made, and more can be expected.
This ongoing discussion of the various candidates’ merits and drawbacks recalls how airplanes protect themselves from missile attacks by launching a false target.
Public interest is the missile, and the target is the “ruling power,” which protects itself by providing a decoy in the form of aimless talk.
But a more fundamental question is why Russia’s politicians, journalists, and analysts (and even some in the West) happily engage in this ruse.
At the moment, who will succeed Putin is not important; what counts is the process that will result in the choice of Russia’s third president.
The real historical significance of the choice that Russia will face in 2008 will be determined not by the next president’s personal qualities, but by his loyalties – that is, to whom he owes his job.
Putin’s successor (whoever that will be) will come to power as a result of a deal within a narrow elite circle.
This means that he will be accountable to and dependent on those who raised him to power, not in a symbolic sense, but in the quite real sense of fulfilling promises and facing sanctions if he does not.
This narrow circle comprises not only very rich and resourceful people, but also members of informal but very effective organizations (which are often, perhaps not entirely correctly, called “mafia”).
Thus, the implementation of Operation Successor (which may include the extension of the current president’s term) has imitated the way Putin himself came to power, and leaves Russia on the same path that Yeltsin set in the last years of his presidency – a path that will either ruin the country or bring it to a dead end.
Politicians who come to power by winning a free and fair election are accountable primarily to voters.
However, the existence of real political opposition creates a different atmosphere, which spreads beyond elections.
Free elections do not determine politicians’ behavior, and do not necessarily ensure that moral, energetic, and intelligent people fill high offices.
But freedom and democracy do restrict arbitrariness and theft, and encourage politicians, regardless of their moral qualities, to take public interests into account.
If the next president comes to power by means of a free and fair election, Russia will have a real chance at a decent future.
However, if Putin’s successor ��� or Putin himself – is imposed on the country in an uncompetitive way, Russia will remain on its current path to nowhere.
Unfortunately, what is most important to comprehend in this moment is barely recognized, much less discussed.
KABUL – “The Taliban come to any house they please, by force.
Then they fire from that house, and then ISAF and the Afghan National Army fire at the house.
But if I tell the Taliban not to enter, the Taliban will kill me.
That experience, recounted by a resident of Afghanistan’s Marja district, is all too frequent in the country.
It is long past time for civilians to stop bearing the brunt of it.
Every day, United Nations human-rights workers in Afghanistan meet community members in districts and villages on fact-finding missions into incidents of civilian casualties.
Our recent mid-year report found that 1,462 Afghan civilians were killed in the first half of this year, the highest number since the UN started documenting deaths and injuries of civilians in 2007.
Fighting continues in Afghanistan, with the surge of the international military forces and Afghan government forces and the spring-summer offensive by the Taliban and other insurgents.
While we are all working to assist in finding an Afghan-led political solution to this conflict, the fighting is not going to stop immediately.
Therefore, it is essential that those fighting take very seriously their obligation not to target civilians – indeed, to do everything possible to protect them.
The Taliban and other insurgents are responsible for nearly 80% of civilian casualties, so they bear the greatest responsibility to change their behavior.
Insurgents’ targeted assassinations of civilians, including teachers, government employees, and civilian workers must stop, and the UN has called for these groups to end their use of pressure-plate improvised explosive devices (IEDs), which cause the greatest number of civilian casualties.
As the name suggests, they are triggered indiscriminately by weight – the foot of a child, a teenager’s bicycle, or an elderly man walking to market.
As massive anti-personnel mines, these IEDs are illegal and morally indefensible.
While errors by international and government forces are responsible for a far lower rate (about 14%) of civilian casualties, the impact on Afghan communities is no less severe.
Airstrikes by international forces – mainly attacks from helicopters – caused 79 civilian casualties in the first half of 2011.
Afghans look to their government and the international forces to protect them, so, when awful mistakes occur, the negative impact is doubled.
International forces should therefore continue to strengthen their control systems, particularly with respect to air strikes, in order to minimize the risk of civilian casualties.
Reducing and ultimately eliminating civilian casualties in this war is a moral and legal obligation for all combatants.
Unfortunately, while the frequency of combat-related security incidents may have declined since the 2011 pro-government surge, this has not resulted in a reduction in civilian casualties.
Even beyond their international legal and moral obligation to avoid civilian casualties and protect civilians, the Taliban and other insurgent groups should see that ending civilian casualties is in their own interest.
Killing and maiming men, women, and children can do nothing to further their cause in the eyes of ordinary Afghans.
If the Taliban want to find a legitimate place in Afghan society and political life, stopping the assassinations and use of illegal pressure-plate IEDs would send a powerful message.
We are all aware that an end to the Afghan people’s suffering requires an end to the conflict.
Talks, not the killing of civilians, are the way to accomplish this.
Stopping the killing and maiming of civilians is becoming essential and urgent in this effort.
An end to civilian casualties could also help to create an atmosphere in which all sides begin to develop the mutual confidence essential to taking the next step – talking to each other to find a way to end the conflict – an outcome that is both necessary and possible.
The Afghan people deserve nothing less, and they cannot afford to wait any longer.
WASHINGTON, DC – A year ago, Emmanuel Macron’s decisive victory in the French presidential election, and his party’s subsequent success in legislative elections, caused many to breathe a sigh of relief.
The rising tide of extremist populism in the West, it seemed, had finally turned.
But the stunning emergence of a populist majority government in Italy, a founding member of the European Union, does not necessarily spell disaster.
True, populists’ growing strength is threatening traditional center-right and center-left parties and making it very difficult for EU-level governance, in its current form, to function.
But what if populist movements’ continued electoral success helps to drive forward a broader political restructuring that ultimately strengthens European democracy?
Having never held elected office, Macron created a new party centered on himself, with support from both center-left and center-right voters.
Next year’s European Parliament election is likely to reveal more about the potential for such political restructuring.
The European Parliament has never generated the same level of interest as other European institutions, such as the Commission, the Council, or even the Court of Justice.
European parliamentary debates rarely make it far outside Brussels or Strasbourg, and voter turnout to fill the body’s seats has typically been low.
Such facts have long been cited as evidence that the EU suffers from a democratic deficit, with citizens inadequately engaged with European-level governance.
But as a series of crises have hit the EU – affecting most acutely Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Italy – these dynamics have been changing.
Gone are the days when Europeans quietly accepted the EU, despite some complaints.
Now, the EU is at the center of domestic political debates, which increasingly include existential questions about the survival of the eurozone and the entire European project.
This means that candidates in next year’s election are unlikely just to focus on domestic issues.
While there will be some of that, there is likely also to be, for the first time, extensive discussion about Europe’s future and policies, especially in areas like migration, defense and security, energy and climate, and relations with major powers like the United States and Russia.
After all, despite their differences, virtually every country in Europe is currently grappling with the question of how much Europe it wants, how open and optimistic it should be about new forms of technology-enabled globalization, and how much social solidarity is appropriate.
These discussions – and thus the European Parliament that emerges next year – are unlikely to adhere to standard party lines.
After all, sticking to traditional political groupings is highly difficult nowadays, as exemplified by Macron’s party – La République En Marche ! – which does not fit neatly into traditional ideological categories.
Though truly supranational politics in Europe remains uncharted terrain, it makes sense that a strongly pro-EU politician should be one of its pioneers.
Right-wing populists, as nationalist and anti-European as they may be, also seem eager to support one another at the European level, taking advantage of their common platforms on most issues, particularly immigration, cultural identity, and trade.
This will be more difficult for the far left, at least in France, which combines traditionally liberal views on immigration with protectionist economic policies that look at lot like those espoused by the populist right.
Of course, the traditional center-right and center-left parties – which have lost a large share of the electorate over the last five years, particularly in Spain, Italy, France, and, to a lesser extent, Germany – will try to regain their own footing.
The problem is that these parties seem outdated to many younger voters, regardless of their leaders’ age.
If they are to succeed, they will need to provide an inspiring new platform that convincingly addresses the issues of the today – all while contending with new political forces.
It is possible, however, that new political forces will in some cases absorb traditional center-right and center-left parties.
In France, for example, Macron’s party could absorb the center-right Les Republicains, or it could shift further to the left, with a social solidarity program to accompany the liberal market measures it has already taken.
The question is whether the party’s leaders think they can secure a simultaneous victory against Les Republicains and the center-left Socialists.
Although the details remain unclear, a thorough restructuring of the European political scene – shaped largely by attitudes toward Europe – seems certain.
If the European Parliament election next year helps to advance this restructuring, this may end up constituting a large step forward for democracy in Europe.
OXFORD – With the election of a reform-minded centrist president in France and the re-election of German Chancellor Angela Merkel seeming ever more likely, is there hope for the stalled single-currency project in Europe?
Perhaps, but another decade of slow growth, punctuated by periodic debt-related convulsions, still looks more likely.
With a determined move toward fiscal and banking union, things could be much better.
But, in the absence of policies to strengthen stability and sustainability, the chances of an eventual collapse are much greater.
Over the past year, the eurozone has been enjoying a solid cyclical recovery, outperforming expectations more than any other major advanced economy.
And make no mistake: the election of Emmanuel Macron is a landmark event, raising hopes that France will re-energize its economy sufficiently to become a full and equal partner to Germany in eurozone governance.
Macron and his economic team are full of promising ideas, and he will have a huge majority in the National Assembly to implement them (though it will help if the Germans give him leeway on budget deficits in exchange for reform).
In Spain, too, economic reform is translating into stronger long-term growth.
Greece is still barely growing, after experiencing one of the worst recessions in history, although those who blame this on German austerity clearly have not looked at the numbers: with encouragement from left-leaning US economists, Greece mismanaged perhaps the softest bailout package in modern history.
Italy has done far better than Greece, but that is a backhanded compliment; real income is actually lower than a decade ago (albeit it is hard to know for sure, given the country’s vast underground economy).
For southern Europe as a whole, the single currency has proved to be a golden cage, forcing greater fiscal and monetary rectitude but removing the exchange rate as a critical cushion against unexpected shocks.
Indeed, part of the reason the United Kingdom’s economy has held up well (so far) since last year’s Brexit referendum is that the pound fell sharply, boosting competitiveness.
The UK, of course, famously (and wisely) opted out of the single currency even as it is now moving (not so wisely) to withdraw from the European Union and the single market entirely.
It is now fairly obvious that the euro was not necessary to the success of the EU, and instead has proved a massive impediment, as many economists on this side of the Atlantic had predicted.
Eurocrats have long likened European integration to riding a bicycle: one must keep moving forward or fall down.
If so, the premature adoption of the single currency is best thought of as a detour through thick, wet cement.
Ironically, by far the main reason why euro adoption was originally so popular in Southern Europe was that back in the 1980s and 1990s, ordinary people longed for the price stability Germans enjoyed with their Deutsche Mark.
But, while the euro has been accompanied by a dramatic eurozone wide fall in inflation, most other countries have managed to bring down inflation without it.
Far more important to the achievement of price stability has been the advent of the modern independent central bank, a device that has helped dramatically reduce inflation levels worldwide.
Yes, a few places, such as Venezuela, still have triple-digit price growth, but they are now rarities.
It is very likely that if, instead of joining the euro, Italy and Spain had simply granted their central banks more autonomy, they, too, would have low inflation today.
Greece is admittedly a less obvious case; but, considering that many poor African countries have been able to keep inflation well within single digits, one can presume that Greece would have managed as well.
Indeed, if Southern European countries had kept their own currencies, they might never have dug as big a debt hole, and would have had the option of partial default through inflation.
Although many European politicians are loath to admit it, the status quo is probably not sustainable; eventually, there must be either significantly greater fiscal integration or a chaotic break-up.
It is astonishingly naive to think the euro will not face further real-life stress tests over the next 5-10 years, if not sooner.
If the status quo is ultimately unsustainable, why are markets so supremely calm, with ten-year Italian government bonds yielding less than two percentage points more than Germany’s?
Perhaps the small spread reflects investors’ belief that outright bailouts are eventually coming, however much German politicians protest to the contrary.
European Central Bank purchases of periphery countries’ debt already constitute an implicit subsidy, and discussion of Eurobonds is heating up with Macron’s victory.
Or perhaps investors are gambling that the South has walked too far into the cement to get out.
Germany will just keep squeezing their budgets in order to ensure that its banks are repaid.
Either way, eurozone leaders would be better off taking action now, rather than waiting for the single currency’s next moment of truth.
How long today’s optimism lasts is for Macron and Merkel to decide.
BEIJING: The problems of China's huge state-owned industries (SOEs) lie half-remembered on the edge of public and political concern.
Given the robust growth of China's private economy over the past decade, this indifference may be somewhat justified.
But how long China's two economies can continue to coexist is becoming a central question for policymakers.
In Germany, restructuring of the SOEs of the former East Germany began soon after reunification and proceeded quickly, due to Chancellor Kohl's political will and the vast financial resources lavished on the problem.
China provides the other extreme, postponing SOE reform for as long as possible even though the economy was growing fast, with the market taking root in most parts of Chinese life.
This fact convinces many observers that the political will and financial muscle will never exist to tackle the SOEs.
The central government has given a "green light" to the sale of small SOEs run by local governments (counties and cities), which can be sold to private owners, individual, corporate, or foreign investors, as well as workers in the firms themselves.
Although such restructuring so far often takes the form of mergers and bankruptcy, a great many SOEs have been converted into some kind of share-holding corporations, with the majority of shares held by workers in the firms.
Many local governments, indeed, began these reforms without the official permission of Beijing administrators.
Indeed, few local leaders reported what they were doing, one reason why few people are aware of how extensive this effort at SOE reform has been.
From the start of China's economic reform the saying "do it without saying it" has been the rule.
Today's official recognition of this longstanding practice will only encourage a speedier pace to these reforms.
The major achievement of China's 17 years of institutional reform and economic growth has been the growth of a dynamic non-state sector consisting of private firms, self-employed businesses, corporate joint-ventures with foreign capital, and community owned rural enterprises.
This new sector now provides more than 60% of industrial output, 50% of gdp, and contributes 80% to China's soaring growth.
Against this burgeoning private economy, the SOEs remained in sluggish isolation.
Managerial changes in SOEs began early on in the reform process, with decisionmaking decentralized and inter-firm relations put on a more commercial footing.
Ownership change was ruled off the reform agenda, however, reflecting not only ideological principles but, mainly, the desire to keep SOEs under the state's control.
Resistance to reform could for a time be justified, so long as: 1 firms in the state sector retained a profitable position in a region's economy; 2. the mobility of state employees remained low; and 3, the non-state sector was not strong enough in both financial terms and entrepreneurial capability to take over the vast state sector.
Development of the non-state sector and the huge change in the overall structure of China's economy has forced a reassessment of the SOEs.
As SOE profitability, despite their privileged position, continues to decline (it averaged less than 2% in 1995) because of ongoing deterioration in the management of assets and competition from the non-state sector, policymakers and workers in state industries begin to open their minds to the prospect of more change.
They cannot fail to note that the non-state sector provides more jobs (80% of new jobs in the last decade) and higher incomes, as well as an increasing share of government revenues, over 50% in some coastal regions.
Such numbers mean that effective reform policies are gaining a constituency within the state sector.
To leave SOEs through layoffs, reemployment in the private sector, early retirement, or a lump sum payment becomes more palatable to SOE workers who fear that the state can no longer be a reliable provider of privileges and economic well being in a constantly evolving society.
With the growth of private savings, the capital restructuring of SOEs (putting private investors in control) without outright sales of state assets (ie, public redistribution of the capital stock) becomes feasible in both economic and political terms.
Germany succeeded -- to greater and lesser degrees -- in managing the transformation of the SOEs it inherited because of the wealth of West Germany.
Given the process now underway, perhaps China's reforms are not so very different.
For in China a German-style "wirtschaftswunder" (economic miracle) has been growing up side by side with the state economy.
This new rival economy is now permitting the same sort of restructuring Germany undertook in the early 1990s.
The pace is more gradual, and will take time and incite many conflicts.
But although the language of China's incremental reforms always seems to be cautious, the results on the ground are radical.
BEIJING – In what some might consider a surprising development, China – currently the world’s largest emitter of carbon dioxide – is emerging as a global leader in climate policy as it seeks to build a cleaner and more efficient economy.
Indeed, China’s efforts to curb pollution and environmental destruction, while shifting to a more sustainable growth model, can provide valuable lessons for governments worldwide.
The first step toward sustainable economic growth is to recognize, as China’s leaders have, that pollution – produced largely through coal-fired power plants – is profoundly damaging citizens’ lives and livelihoods, particularly in major cities like Beijing and Shanghai.
Moreover, greenhouse-gas emissions are contributing to climate change, the effects of which, as the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change warns, could prove devastating for all countries, with China highly vulnerable.
Moreover, China is already the world’s largest oil importer, and energy demand continues to increase rapidly.
In this context, the authorities’ effort to accelerate the shift of China’s growth model to one that is more innovative, inclusive, efficient, and sustainable represents the only feasible way forward.
The good news is that some progress has already been made, innovation is occurring rapidly, and clear plans are being formulated and implemented.
China is now the world’s largest investor in clean energy, with a record $68 billion channeled toward renewable-energy development in 2012 and another $54 billion last year.
Furthermore, its non-fossil energy supply more than doubled from 2005 to 2013 while the CO2 intensity of GDP fell by 28%.
And China’s reliance on coal-based energy is decreasing, with the rate of decline targeted to accelerate.
Over the last eight years, China’s economy has grown by an average of 10% annually – a total increase of around 115% – leading to a 53% increase in CO2 emissions.
Fortunately, China’s government recognizes the need to pursue more stable, higher-quality GDP growth.
At the same time, given slower growth in world markets and the challenges of domestic structural adjustment, the annual growth target has been reduced, to around 7.5%.
These structural adjustments are aimed at reducing China’s dependence on heavy industry and manufacturing exports while fostering domestic consumption, promoting higher-tech activities, and strengthening the services sector.
This shift will naturally bring about a decline in demand for energy-intensive raw materials like iron, steel, and cement; at the same time, it will better equip China for the next stages of its development.
To support these efforts, China will build generating stations that rely on natural gas, nuclear power, and renewable sources.
The government has already pledged $286 billion to renewable-energy development and $376 billion to energy-conservation projects in 2011-2015.
Investment in coal-fired electricity generation has been shrinking year on year since 2005.
As a result, by 2020, China’s consumption of energy generated from sources other than fossil fuels will be roughly equivalent to Japan’s total energy consumption.
Non-fossil energy sources will comprise 15% of China’s overall energy mix, reaching 20-25% by 2030.
Along with more stringent restrictions on coal consumption and greenhouse-gas emissions, the upcoming 13th Five-Year Plan, for 2016-2020, will include additional investment in research and development.
With this mix of policies, Chinese carbon emissions could peak by 2030, even as the economy grows at a rate of 4-5%.
In fact, with a sufficiently strong commitment from policymakers and businesses, China could reach its clean-energy goals ahead of schedule.
Indeed, moving to a path that offers a reasonable chance of preventing the average global temperature from rising more than 2oC above the level reached in the late nineteenth century – the established international goal – requires that other countries, too, accelerate progress.
This transformation promises not only to benefit the environment, but also to create new sources of economic growth and employment opportunities.
The Chinese dream of one billion citizens living in thriving cities – with access to high-quality education, job opportunities in high-tech industries, and a thriving services sector – can become reality.
At the same time, they can benefit from the technological advances and cost reductions that Chinese investment in renewable-energy R&D and deployment is enabling.
Finally, China’s deepening commitment to sustainability could improve the chances that the United Nations climate conference in Paris in 2015 will produce a global agreement.
The global nature of environmental challenges creates an important opportunity for international cooperation based on shared interest.
Such cooperation should extend beyond emissions-reduction targets to technology transfer, knowledge sharing, and economic opportunity.
Rich-country policymakers, in particular, should bear in mind this imperative, given their economies’ history of high emissions and greater access to technology.
While China’s economic transformation is vital to its long-term prosperity, it is one – albeit important – step toward mitigating the massive risks associated with climate change.
Wittingly or unwittingly, individuals do things that injure other individuals.
For society to function, it must provide individuals with incentives not to do so, through rewards and punishments, regulations and fines.
Indeed, this is perhaps the central moral imperative--do unto others as you would have them do unto you, and do not do unto others as you would not have them do unto you.
Immanuel Kant, with his categorical imperative, provided the philosophical foundations for those who wanted an alternative basis for ethics than that provided by religious aphorisms.
But modern society cannot and does not simply rely on individuals doing the "right" thing.
After all, corporations don't have a conscience; it is only the conscience of those who run the corporation, and as America's recent corporate scandals have made all too clear, conscience often takes a backseat to profits.
America's legal system makes sure that firms that produce a defective, and particularly an unsafe product, are held liable for the consequences.
Firms are in a far better position than consumers to assess the safety of their product; we all benefit knowing that our legal system has provided corporations with incentives to pay attention to the safety of what they produce.
Similarly, environmental laws make firms liable for their toxic wastes, and many countries, including the US, have enshrined the principle that "polluters pay," that is, companies must pay for the damage they cause.
In other realms, however, we are only beginning to think about what corporate responsibility should mean for our legal system.
In World War II, German corporations were all too willing to profit from the slave labor of those in concentration camps, and Swiss banks were happy to pocket the gold of Jewish victims of Nazi terror.
More recently, oil companies have demonstrated little conscience in providing money that feeds guerrilla movements--so long as their own interests are preserved.
When, in Angola, one brave firm, BP, wanted to do the right thing by trying to make sure that oil royalties actually go to the government, rather than to corrupt officials, other oil companies refused to go along.
In the Congo, the profits of mining companies helped maintain the late President Mobuto of Zaire, now the Congo, in power for decades--enabling him to pillage his country, allegedly facilitated by the secret bank accounts that are the specialty of countries like Switzerland, the Cayman Islands, and Cyprus.
These institutions knew, or they should have known, that their loans and aid was not going to help the country's desperately poor people.
Today, we believe that individuals, corporations, and institutions should be held accountable for their actions.
For a start, it means debt forgiveness: international lenders may not be able to compensate fully the damage caused when their money helps maintain odious autocrats in power, but at least the victims should not be burdened by a disastrous financial legacy.
In South Africa, it was arguably the economic pressure brought by sanctions which eventually brought down the racist Apartheid system; but by the same token, it was economic support from the outside--including loans from multinational banks--which kept the system going for so long.
Those who contributed to maintaining Apartheid--and especially those who did not adhere to the sanctions after the UN approved them--should be held accountable.
The Truth and Reconciliation process may or may not work to heal South Africa's wounds, but if corporations are to be provided with incentives to do the right thing, they must now pay the price for the profits that they reaped from that abhorrent system.
If corporations had a conscience, they would act, without being forced to do so: they would estimate their profit from the Apartheid system and pay it back to the country, with interest.
For Apartheid's demise has not solved the country's deep economic problems, including an unemployment rate in excess of 25%.
So far, there appears to be no rush to make amends in South Africa, and, as elsewhere, the evidence is meager that the corporate conscience runs very deep.
But it is to be hoped that the West's legal systems will provide an alternative recourse, one that will not only partially redress past injustices, but provide incentives for corporations to think twice before profiting from brutal regimes in the future.
BENGHAZI – In the days since the February 17 revolution against Libyan leader Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi, opposition forces in Benghazi have formed a Transitional National Council (TNC) and a Crisis Team (CT) to serve as an interim government.
Some members held senior posts in Qaddafi’s government; others were social activists.
Both groups are now quite popular among the population in rebel-controlled parts of Libya.
But if rebel troops are unable to advance toward the capital of Tripoli, and instead remain deadlocked with Qaddafi’s forces between the towns of Ajdabiyya and Brega, the opposition will face a serious dilemma.
A military impasse could erode their support and even delegitimize them.
When forming the councils, the opposition sought to achieve a balance between government experience, technical expertise, and tribal support.
Thus, while some members, such as former Justice Minister and TNC Chairman Mustafa Abdel-Jalil, were affiliated with Qaddafi’s government, others, such as CT Economic and Finance chief Ali Tarhouni, have lived outside of Libya for almost 30 years.
And powerful clans from Tobruk have succeeded in placing their members in key military positions.
The councils are, moreover, largely a regional affair, with members mostly coming from eastern Libya.
Those with roots in the western regions are mainly dissidents who have lived abroad for decades.
TNC officials admit that some council members are based in western Libya, but have refused to identify them for security reasons.
Conflicts have already erupted between TNC members as well as between members of the military leadership.
Bolstered by his high profile as Justice Minister, Jalil has emerged as an interim leader.
But once the TNC makes the transition toward becoming an elected body, the more charismatic CT Director Mahmoud Jibril and the astute council spokesman Abdul Hafiz Ghoga may emerge as the rebels’ true leaders.
On the military side, simmering tensions between two officers are frustrating combat strategy.
Colonel Khalifa Hifter, a close Qaddafi supporter before he deserted following his capture by Chadian forces in 1987 during Libya’s war with its southern neighbor, has proved unwilling to fall into line behind the chief of staff, former Interior Minister Abdul Fatah Younis.
Such political and military spats are likely to continue as officials attempt to consolidate their positions.
The two groups are hard-pressed to formulate a clear political and social platform.
TNC and CT members are largely unified in their desire to end Qaddafi’s 41-year rule and redistribute the country’s wealth to the country’s long-neglected eastern region.
As a result, they have not articulated a coherent vision of a post-Qaddafi Libya.
And, though the two councils are certainly staffed by people with the technical credentials needed to manage the economy, few members have any real political skills or experience overseeing bureaucratic bodies.
So far, these shortcomings have not prevented the TNC from achieving widespread support in the rebel-controlled east.
Inhabitants of Benghazi praise Abdul Jalil and his colleagues.
Municipal councils in Bayda, Darna, and Tobruk have pledged their support for the TNC, and fighters who battled American forces in Iraq have lined up behind the body’s military leaders.
People here are content to be free from Qaddafi’s erratic policies and pervasive security services.
“Anyone but Qaddafi,” one man in Tobruk told me.
This partly explains why Libyans are willing to embrace dissidents who lived abroad for decades, about whom they know little.
This warm welcome contrasts with Iraqi distrust of the political exiles who returned on the coattails of the American overthrow of Saddam Hussein’s regime in 2003.
But support for the TNC is largely skin deep – it is neither grounded in knowledge of how the opaque council functions, nor based on an understanding of its goals.
As such, once the initial euphoria dissipates, Libyans are likely to turn against the TNC if it cannot deliver battlefield successes.
With the rebels lacking professional military training and discipline, such gains look increasingly unlikely.
To ensure that the rebels have a fighting chance against Qaddafi’s better-equipped troops, Western countries will have to move beyond air strikes and offering the TNC diplomatic recognition.
They will need to provide medium-range rockets and light armored vehicles to anti-regime forces, in addition to training them to use their weapons properly.
Such a mission will require sending hundreds more military specialists to Libya than the few dozen that Britain, France, and Italy have pledged.
Without a large influx of instructors and weapons, the rebels will not be able to advance toward the capital, Tripoli, in the coming months.
Such a stalemate is likely to leave Libyans frustrated with the council.
And the vague slogans that its leaders are currently offering will likely be viewed as hollow promises.
Since the council’s legitimacy stems exclusively from Libyan good will and blind faith, rather than from success at the ballot box, this could be devastating.
In a few short weeks, the Libyan opposition has been able to win the support of the population in the east without accomplishing much more than forming a provisional political body.
To maintain that support, however, opposition leaders must ensure that they can respond to their constituents’ demands.
And, above all, that means piling up military victories on the road to Tripoli.
HONG KONG – When the Soviet Union imploded in 1991, the Communist Party of China (CPC) became obsessed with understanding why.
The government think tanks entrusted with this task heaped plenty of blame on Mikhail Gorbachev, the reformist leader who was simply not ruthless enough to hold the Soviet Union together.
But Chinese leaders also highlighted other important factors, not all of which China’s leaders seem to be heeding today.
To be sure, the CPC has undoubtedly taken to heart the first key lesson: strong economic performance is essential to political legitimacy.
And the CPC’s single-minded focus on spurring GDP growth over the last few decades has delivered an “economic miracle,” with nominal per capita income skyrocketing from $333 in 1991 to $7,329 last year.
But overseeing a faltering economy was hardly the only mistake Soviet leaders made.
They were also drawn into a costly and unwinnable arms race with the United States, and fell victim to imperial overreach, throwing money and resources at regimes with little strategic value and long track records of chronic economic mismanagement.
As China enters a new “cold war” with the US, the CPC seems to be at risk of repeating the same catastrophic blunders.
At first glance, it may not seem that China is really engaged in an arms race with the US.
After all, China’s official defense budget for this year – at roughly $175 billion – amounts to just one-quarter of the $700 billion budget approved by the US Congress.
But China’s actual military spending is estimated to be much higher than the official budget: according to the Stockholm International Peace Research Institute, China spent some $228 billion on its military last year, roughly 150% of the official figure of $151 billion.
In any case, the issue is not the amount of money China spends on guns per se, but rather the consistent rise in military expenditure, which implies that the country is prepared to engage in a long-term war of attrition with the US.
Yet China’s economy is not equipped to generate sufficient resources to support the level of spending that victory on this front would require.
If China had a sustainable growth model underpinning a highly efficient economy, it might be able to afford a moderate arms race with the US.
On the macro level, China’s growth is likely to continue to decelerate, owing to rapid population aging, high debt levels, maturity mismatches, and the escalating trade war that the US has initiated.
For example, as the old-age dependency ratio rises, so will health-care and pension costs.
Moreover, while the Chinese economy may be far more efficient than the Soviet economy was, it is nowhere near as efficient as that of the US.
The main reason for this is the enduring clout of China’s state-owned enterprises (SOEs), which consume half of the country’s total bank credit, but contribute only 20% of value-added and employment.
The problem for the CPC is that SOEs play a vital role in sustaining one-party rule, as they are used both to reward loyalists and to facilitate government intervention on behalf of official macroeconomic targets.
Dismantling these bloated and inefficient firms would thus amount to political suicide.
Yet protecting them may merely delay the inevitable, because the longer they are allowed to suck scarce resources out of the economy, the more unaffordable an arms race with the US will become – and the greater the challenge to the CPC’s authority will become.
The second lesson that China’s leaders have failed to appreciate adequately is the need to avoid imperial overreach.
About a decade ago, with massive trade surpluses bringing in a surfeit of hard currency, the Chinese government began to take on costly overseas commitments and subsidize deadbeat “allies.”
Exhibit A is the much-touted Belt and Road Initiative (BRI), a $1 trillion program focused on the debt-financed construction of infrastructure in developing countries.
Despite early signs of trouble – which, together with the Soviet Union’s experience, should give the CPC pause – China seems to be determined to push ahead with the BRI, which the country’s leaders have established as a pillar of their new “grand strategy.”
An even more egregious example of imperial overreach is China’s generous aid to countries – from Cambodia to Venezuela to Russia – that offer little in return.
According to AidData at the College of William and Mary, from 2000 to 2014, Cambodia, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Cuba, Ethiopia, and Zimbabwe together received $24.4 billion in Chinese grants or heavily subsidized loans.
Over the same period, Angola, Laos, Pakistan, Russia, Turkmenistan, and Venezuela received $98.2 billion.
Now, China has pledged to provide $62 billion in loans for the “China-Pakistan Economic Corridor.”
That program will help Pakistan confront its looming balance-of-payments crisis; but it will also drain the Chinese government’s coffers at a time when trade protectionism threatens their replenishment.
Like the Soviet Union, China is paying through the nose for a few friends, gaining only limited benefits while becoming increasingly entrenched in an unsustainable arms race.
The Sino-American Cold War has barely started, yet China is already on track to lose.
The United Kingdom will, without a doubt, leave the European Union and negotiate new trade agreements.
Britain, May has made clear, doesn’t want an arrangement like that of Switzerland or Norway, because that would require it to cede some control over its immigration policy.
Submitting to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice, which UK leaders accuse of delivering judgments based on vested interests, is not an option, either.
But the EU is not ready simply to allow the UK to drop whatever it doesn’t like, at least not without paying a price.
The EU’s leaders insist that the UK cannot have free trade with the single market without allowing free movement of people.
This stubbornness arises partly from the fear that, if the UK secured such a lopsided deal, other EU countries would attempt to do the same.
But the desire to punish the British, if only to deter other member states from bolting, is surely also a contributing factor.
While it is undoubtedly regrettable that the UK is leaving, the truth is that free trade with the EU does not have to be accompanied by free movement of people.
As pure trade theory shows, the economic effects and welfare gains resulting from free trade are substituted, not enhanced, by those of free movement of labor.
If migration is not possible, different wage structures are more likely to arise among countries – bringing different price structures with them.
These differences increase gains from trade; indeed, exploiting such differences is the entire point of trade.
If the EU refuses to sustain free trade with the UK, its citizens will suffer as much as the British.
The argument that other EU countries would be likely to follow the UK’s lead is dubious.
One fulfills the criterion of Pareto optimality: because the community makes decisions unanimously – or, at least, adhering to rules that protect minorities – it implements measures that provide advantages to some or all members and create disadvantages for none.
That approach means that countries are not fighting for a bigger piece of the pie at the expense of others.
Instead, they work together voluntarily to ensure that the pie keeps growing, and that everyone gets a decent slice.
The other type of community is characterized by, first, the redistribution of resources among countries and, second, by majority decision-making.
Here, there are winners and losers, because the majority can force through its preferences, even if the gains its members reap are dwarfed by the losses incurred by the minority.
As a result, the pie often becomes smaller, and some countries end up very unhappy.
This second type is inherently unstable, because the losers tend to opt out.
The only way to keep them in is to make leaving even less appealing – say, by punishing them.
By seeking to make an example of the UK, the EU is sending the message that it is a union in which some members are bound to lose.
This is the narrative being promoted by America’s new president, Donald Trump, who has declared his support for the British and his expectation that more countries will follow suit.
To avoid such an outcome, the EU must transform itself from a redistributive union ruled by the majority to an optimal and voluntary union ruled by unanimity – one that conforms to the Pareto principle.
The first step should be to scrap the plan to install a common EU finance minister at the head of an authority with autonomous taxation powers.
If the EU does not shift its approach, it risks becoming a non-consensual community in which only some members are happy – and others want out.
While penalties and other coercive measures may be able to keep wavering member states in for a while, this approach would leave the EU susceptible to instability and its members vulnerable to exploitation.
As counter-intuitive as it may seem, the only way to keep the EU together is to let Britain go, on generous terms.
JACKSON HOLE, WYOMING – As central bankers from around the world gather this week in Jackson Hole for the Federal Reserve’s annual Economic Policy Symposium, one key topic of discussion will be the current global stock-market turmoil.
There are many reasons for these gyrations, but the expectation that the Fed will start to raise interest rates – perhaps as early as September – is clearly one of them.
The International Monetary Fund forecasts 3% annual growth in 2015 and 2016, accompanied by inflation rates of 0.1% and 1.5%, respectively.
When an economy is normalizing, it is reasonable to reduce expansionary measures, such as those introduced after the crisis of 2008.
Because the Fed has clearly communicated that it will move gradually toward less expansionary policies, its credibility would be damaged if it did not follow through.
But there are strong reasons for the Fed to postpone interest-rate hikes and to keep monetary policy expansionary over the coming quarters.
In other recent recoveries, growth often hit 4% or even 5% when increased capacity utilization pushed up productivity and investment.
Over the past three decades, the US has been able to grow at an average annual rate of around 2.5%.
Some attribute relatively slow growth to demographic factors, which have reduced the labor force, as well as to weak productivity levels, which have been low.
But America’s potential output may be underestimated, and its inflation propensity exaggerated.
Self-employment, short-term contracts, or part-time arrangements account for many of the jobs that have been created over the past few years.
This ongoing “Uberization” of the US labor market means that the balance in the wage-setting process has shifted.
As a result, it will take longer for demand to feed through to wages and inflation than in the past.
Moreover, the economy is undergoing an ongoing technological shift stemming from digitization and globalization.
Estimates from Citigroup indicate that almost half of all jobs will be disrupted in the coming decades.
Jobs that require lower skills and less training are particularly vulnerable; but it is also clear that many other occupational categories – including administration, accounting, logistics, banking, and various service activities – are likely to be affected.
Companies will be able to reduce their headcount and production costs while improving customer service, which, like Uberization, will affect the wage-setting process.
Central bankers, I believe, are underestimating the impact of this structural shift.
In the more tech-oriented economies, like the US, the United Kingdom, and the Nordic countries, there is a risk that traditional macroeconomic models will overestimate the cost pressure from labor.
Another reason why the Fed should postpone a rate hike is that financial turmoil in emerging markets, particularly China, could have a substantial impact on the global economy, with some clear implications for the US economy.
In particular, lower energy and commodity prices are likely to dampen inflationary pressure.
When inflation is low for a long period, inflation expectations also tend to be low.
Add falling commodity and energy prices to the mix and there is a risk that inflation expectations will remain too low to sustain a balanced recovery.
The global implications of lower emerging-market currencies are also likely to be deflationary.
The indirect effect, which might be substantial, is that cost-competitive light manufacturing in emerging markets increases.
That would reinforce the deflationary pressure from globalization for years to come.
There is also a risk of greater currency-market volatility if the Fed jumps the gun in raising rates.
But, because they flooded global markets with liquidity, large portfolio flows have moved into emerging-market countries, whose currencies often are not as liquid as the dollar.
When investment moves back into dollars, the currency fluctuations in these less liquid markets can become excessive.
The Fed clearly has a responsibility to consider how its policy decisions affect the global financial system.
Excessive currency volatility is not in America’s interest, not least because large exchange-rate depreciations in emerging markets would amplify the effects of globalization on US jobs, wages, and inflation, particularly as weaker foreign currencies make outsourcing a more economically viable solution.
Another reason for the Fed to reconsider hiking rates is that the legitimacy of the Bretton Woods institutions depends on a well-functioning global financial system.
The global economy’s center of gravity is moving to Asia, Latin America, and Africa, but the IMF and the World Bank still seem to mirror the reality of the 1950s.
If the Fed is seen as unleashing a major crisis in emerging markets, this will almost certainly do long-term damage to the global financial system.
The Fed should regard lower commodity prices, reduced inflationary pressures, changes in the labor market, and further disruptive technological shifts as sufficiently convincing arguments to postpone a rate hike.
Including the risk of excessive volatility in the global financial system tips the balance even further.
There is plenty of time for the Fed to signal that its policy stance has shifted, and the conclave in Jackson Hole is an excellent opportunity to start that communication.
The greatest loss of credibility always comes when policymakers try to ignore changing realities.
BERKELEY – Christine Lagarde, the International Monetary Fund’s managing director, recently warned that the world risks a new “mediocre normal” of slower growth.
Economic policymakers around the world are looking for ways to boost growth, with infrastructure investment topping most lists.
But, as Lagarde regularly reminds her audiences, another, often-overlooked remedy is to increase the economic participation and advancement of women.
Women account for half of the global labor supply and about 70% of the world’s consumption demand.
Yet there remains a long way to go in realizing their economic potential, as the World Economic Forum’s just-released Global Gender Gap Report 2014 confirms.
In many countries, both developed and developing, men and women are at or near parity when it comes to education and health, according to the report, which covers 142 countries and 94% of the world’s population.
But, as the attack on the heroic Pakistani schoolgirl and Nobel Peace Prize laureate Malala Yousafzai demonstrated, girls and women are still blocked from education in many places, sometimes through violence.
Moreover, in terms of economic participation and opportunity, women continue to lag behind men by a considerable 15-25% even in the most gender-equal societies.
Globally, only about half of working-age women are employed, and they earn three-quarters as much as men, even when they have the same level of education and are in the same occupation.
Meanwhile, women are over-represented in informal, temporary, and part-time jobs, most of which are low-productivity positions with low pay, no benefits, and limited opportunities for advancement.
Based on the rate of progress over the last nine years, it will take another 81 years to close the world’s economic gender gap and unlock the associated economic benefits.
By one estimate, women hold about 24% of top management positions globally, with comparable figures across regions and development levels.
A recent study by the Credit Suisse Research Institute (CSRI) of 3,000 companies in diverse sectors and countries, however, yields a more depressing conclusion: women occupy only about 13% of top management positions (CEOs and people who report directly to them), on average, with even the highest rate, in North America, amounting to only 15%.
Women’s participation, moreover, is skewed toward positions in less influential areas like shared services, in which opportunities for promotion to top positions are limited.
And, though female participation on company boards has increased in almost every country and sector over the last three years, with the largest gains occurring in countries that have introduced quotas, women hold only about 12.7% of board positions, on average.
Healthy, educated women are more likely to have healthier and more educated children, creating a virtuous circle of development.
WEF data suggest a strong correlation between a country’s progress in closing the gender gap – particularly in education and the labor force – and its economic competitiveness.
Companies with more women in top management and board positions better reflect the profiles of their customers and employees, benefit from more diverse views when solving problems, rank higher on indicators of organizational cooperation and health, and report higher profitability and returns on equity.
Furthermore, the CSRI study indicates higher returns on equity, higher valuations, and higher payout ratios, with no discernible differences in risk-taking.
Realizing the economic potential of women requires changes in policies, business practices, and attitudes.
Developed countries should invest in affordable child care, early childhood education, and parental leave; shift from family to individual taxes; and provide more generous tax credits, benefits, and protections for low-wage and part-time workers.
In developing countries, legal reforms that give women equal rights in land ownership, inheritance, and access to credit are essential.
They can set targets for recruitment and retention levels; initiate affirmative searches to meet those targets; introduce mentorship programs and diversity training to attract, retain, and promote women; and establish transparent salary bands to help track and reduce gender pay gaps.
At the same time, human-resource practices should take account of unconscious biases, risks of stereotyping, and documented gender differences in behavior.
For example, research finds that women tend to be less confident and less likely to negotiate for pay raises and promotions than equally qualified men.
Companies can also use their influence with suppliers, distributors, and partners to support women-owned businesses and encourage gender-neutral advertising.
And companies can change how jobs are structured and remunerated to enhance flexibility, thereby helping both men and women balance work and family demands.
The WEF’s findings show that the Middle East and North Africa suffer from the widest gender gap, with women reaching only 40% of parity in the workplace, on average, compared with nearly 80% in North America.
Over the last nine years, Saudi Arabia has reduced its economic gender gap, relative to its starting point, more than any other country.
Lagarde challenges policymakers and business leaders alike to make changes that broaden economic participation and opportunity for women.
In the words of Klaus Schwab, the WEF’s founder, “Only those economies which have full access to all their talent will remain competitive and will prosper.
It would be difficult to identify more compelling reasons to accelerate progress toward gender parity.
WASHINGTON, DC – American foreign policy stands on the brink of substantial belt-tightening.
The mounting expenses of servicing the growing national debt, combined with the skyrocketing costs of Social Security and Medicare as the 78-million-strong baby-boom generation retires, will leave less money for American initiatives abroad.
As I argue in my new book The Frugal Superpower: America’s Global Leadership in a Cash-Strapped Era, the burden that these obligations will impose on Americans – in the form of higher taxes and fewer benefits – will weaken public support for the expansive international role that the United States has played since World War II.
American foreign policy, for all its shortcomings, has underpinned political stability around the world.
How, then, should the US adapt what it does abroad to minimize the damage to global security caused by its straitened circumstances?
During the first two post-Cold War presidencies, the US conducted military interventions in Somalia, Haiti, Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan, and Iraq.
The motives for these interventions varied, but all led to American efforts to establish working governments – nation-building – that proved protracted and frustrating.
The relevant institutions cannot be built quickly and cannot be imported, ready-made, from abroad.
For this reason, among others, the enterprise has not found favor with the American public.
To its difficulty and unpopularity another drawback to nation-building must now be added: its expense.
The US government will no longer be able to afford to invest hundreds of billions of dollars (the cost in Iraq alone will run into the trillions) trying to supply other people with decent government.
Moreover, such projects make a far smaller contribution to US and global security and well-being than do other American foreign policies – policies that the US should make every effort to continue.
“Don’t chase the rabbits,” an old saying has it, “because if you chase the rabbits, the elephants will kill you.”
Somalia, Haiti, Bosnia, Kosovo, Afghanistan, and even Iraq qualify as rabbits – distractions from what should be the focus of US foreign policy.
The functional equivalents of elephants are Europe, East Asia, and the Middle East.
These are three of the most important parts of the world, and in each the American military presence plays a constructive role.
In the first two, the US reassures each of these region’s countries that there will be no sudden change in the balance of power that will threaten them.
In Europe, Germany can be confident that the US would help to contain an aggressive Russia, while Russia knows that Germany will remain tied to, and thus restrained by, the US.
In East Asia, American air and naval forces provide a check on China, but also serve one of China’s strategic interests by keeping Japan from conducting an independent military policy.
To keep the peace in both regions, a continuing US military presence of some kind will be needed.
Complete American withdrawal could lead to suspicion, arms races, and, in the worst case, wars among the countries of Europe and Asia.
In the Middle East, the US confronts Iran, which seeks to expand its power by any means it can, to oust neighboring countries’ governments in favor of ideologically sympathetic forces, and ultimately to evict America from the region.
Nuclear weapons would make the threat posed by the Iranian regime all the more severe.
Indeed, containing Iran while thwarting its nuclear ambitions is the single most urgent priority for today’s cash-strapped American superpower.
Iran’s quest to dominate the Middle East threatens the world because the region accounts for so much of the oil on which the global economy depends.
If the world used less oil, Iran would become less threatening, because its radical rulers rely on oil revenues to purchase domestic support and pursue their regional goals.
Reducing oil revenues by using less oil would also weaken other international troublemakers, actual and potential – Hugo Chávez of Venezuela, for example, and Vladimir Putin of Russia.
Moreover, some of the money that the world pays for Saudi Arabia’s oil finds its way into the coffers of terrorist organizations.
No single measure would do more to make the world a less dangerous place than a substantial reduction in its consumption of oil.
And no single measure would do more to reduce global oil consumption than a sharp increase in the tax on gasoline in the country that consumes more of it than any other: the US.
If Americans had to pay more for gasoline, they would use less of it.
With a high gasoline price, alternative sources of energy such as ethanol and alternative forms of transportation such as electrically powered automobiles would become commercially viable.
In the short term, Americans would have to make modest economic sacrifices in the form of higher fuel prices.
They would help to ensure that, even in an era of retrenchment in American foreign policy, the world would continue to enjoy the most important benefits of the expansive foreign policy that the US can no longer afford.
PARIS – From Washington, the enthusiasm of the French for intervention in Libya is seen with a mixture of relief and puzzlement.
Indeed, President Nicolas Sarkozy’s willingness to intervene (alongside British Prime Minister David Cameron) helped close a dangerous gap between the world of “values,” which would call for direct American intervention against Muammar el-Qaddafi, and the world of “interest,” which impelled President Barack Obama to restraint.
America’s strategy seems to be to squeeze Qaddafi’s regime out of power through a combination of financial, economic, and even “psychological” pressure aimed at isolating the Colonel from his sources of support within his own inner circle.
While Americans are relieved by France’s display of determination, they cannot refrain from expressing a sense of bemusement: Do the French really know what they are up against?
Indeed, France and the United States seem to have switched roles from just a few years ago.
Listening to Obama’s reflexive and distant speeches on Libya, one can nearly hear French Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin’s flamboyant intervention at the United Nations on the eve of the invasion of Iraq in 2003.
And, though the circumstances and the “legal” environment are very different – there is a UN resolution for the Libya intervention, and a vague declaration of support by the Arab League – Sarkozy’s stance reminds some of George W. Bush’s enthusiasm for war.
The British, too, seem to be regarding the French with some perplexity.
Even though they are fighting side-by-side in Libya, with their armies expressing a deep confidence in each other, there are distinct nuances in each country’s position on military intervention.
The view from London contains the same element of “distance” – if not slight apprehension – found in the view from Washington.
To explain this difference in perspective, perhaps one should venture further into the past than the Iraq War and consider the divergence that already existed traditionally between the United Kingdom’s pragmatic approach to its imperial role and the French Empire’s missionary zeal.
A duty to accumulate wealth catalyzed the former; a duty to civilize inspired the latter.
The spectacular inversion of the French and US roles on the issue of intervention has different causes.
Some are linked to the personalities of Obama and Sarkozy; others reflect the nature of their political imperatives.
Sarkozy’s goal is to “exist” as much as possible on the global stage.
But, beyond personalities and political calculus, what we are witnessing is a fundamental shift in the international system.
It is a shift that raises a major question: if those who are willing to act prove incapable of doing so “successfully,” what happens to global stability unless those who are capable are also willing to step in?
At the crossroads of this question stands NATO, an organization perceived as American by Europeans and international (i.e., not American) by the average US citizen.
But if NATO is – for better or worse – in command on the ground in Libya, it is the UN that has given the necessary green light to French action there.
It is this specific “marriage of reason” between France and the UN that is essential to understanding the French position on Libya.
Indeed, the same relationship between France and the UN that led to the country’s resistance to intervention in Iraq in 2003 has now pushed France to intervene in Libya in 2011.
Yet it is dangerous to believe that the world has found in this new-model Coalition of the Willing the solution that it was seeking in today’s increasingly chaotic post-American order.
Neither France nor Britain – not to mention the European Union, which is more divided than ever when it comes to military interventions – can be seen as substitutes for the US.
Despite Sarkozy’s exceptional activism, they have neither the means nor, in reality, the will.
Confronted with the world’s increasing complexity and America’s decreasing appetite for international responsibilities, the need for adequate rules – and for a referee to enforce them – is greater than ever.
In the face of growing risks of global anarchy, the courageous but risky activism of France and Britain should not be seen as a substitute for an engaged US.
That crisis will not go away unless its sources are understood and the organization reformed.
One major cause of the UN crisis is the change in the international situation after the demise of the Soviet Union and the proliferation of what I call ``incompetent states.''
Many countries that achieved independence as a result of the national liberation movements of the 1940's-1990's have proved themselves incapable of creating the conditions of normal life within their territories.
In the age of globalization, they are also hopelessly and increasingly lagging behind developed states.
Moreover, many of these regimes are simply ineffectual and will collapse or dramatically change in the foreseeable future.
This will inevitably prove to be the source of long-term political and military instability in large parts of Africa, the Middle East, Central and South Asia, as well as a number of former Soviet republics.
The rise of incompetent states brings about huge challenges: proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, terrorism, religious and ethnic strife, rivalry for natural resources, waves of migration, drug trafficking, and deterioration of the environment.
The politically correct policy of affirming each nation's right to self-determination, including the establishment of an independent state, leads to the emergence of more incompetent regimes.
Indeed, incompetent states now comprise almost a majority in the UN, which undermines that body's moral legitimacy in the eyes of many in the developed world.
It also impairs the UN's ability to deal with the most important problems of today's international environment.
The second cause at the root of the UN crisis is the fact that the US is no longer interested in observing the old rules of international relations.
Indeed, America's superpower status makes it increasingly disadvantageous for its leaders to play by rules that, while repeatedly violated in the past, are now viewed as preventing the US from assuming a new role in international affairs.
The new role the US envisages is closely tied to the profound destabilization brought about by the proliferation of incompetent states.
In fact, America has been eager for some time to ``establish order'' in the world and modernize particularly troublesome regimes in highly strategic regions of the world.
In the Middle East and Central Asia, this policy seems at times to have assumed predominance comparable to that of the former doctrine of deterrence deployed against the Soviet Union and its Communist allies.
It was the desire to counter this destabilization and to consolidate its superpower status that was the primary reason for America's actions in Iraq.
The world might not support the US in its unilateral attempts to become the world's policeman, especially because they may well bring more instability.
Nevertheless, it is important to realize why the US is undertaking them and that they respond to a core problem of today's international order.
If Russia and the other countries that opposed America's Iraq policy in the Security Council really wanted to convince the US not to attack Iraq and to defend international law, it was a naive policy doomed to failure.
If we sought to preserve the UN Security Council and the position of the present permanent members, then those actions were more likely to produce the opposite effect.
Similarly, rearguard efforts to prove that those who opposed war in Iraq were right and that the Americans and the Britons wrong, together with demands for ``proof'' that Iraq possessed weapons of mass destruction, are unconstructive and only cause mutual irritation.
The UN cannot be preserved and reformed without cooperation from the US, however distressful this may be to some.
By making the UN an instrument of struggle against America, the UN will only be weakened or written off altogether.
What is needed is a reform that responds to today's international order and updates the increasingly obsolete and ignored body of international law to today's new economic and political realities.
Restructuring must start with the UN Security Council, whose 1945 mandate is no longer viable.
The most obvious solution is to increase the number of permanent members from five to eight or nine (including Germany, Japan, India and possibly Brazil) and to change the voting rules, so that two or three permanent members--rather than just one--are needed to block an action.
Institutionalizing the G-8 and providing it with executive functions could best provide the external impetus that is needed.
If, as is likely, increasing the number of permanent Security Council members lacks sufficient support, developed countries should revert to the idea, circulating in foreign policy circles for several years, of establishing a new G-8-based organization (but including China and India) to counter new threats to global security.
In any case, one thing seems certain: in the absence of a sweeping overhaul, the UN may quickly follow in the footsteps of other institutional relics of the Cold War, such as the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe and NATO.
NEW YORK – The biggest economic news of the year came almost without notice: China has overtaken the United States as the world’s largest economy, according to the scorekeepers at the International Monetary Fund.
And, while China’s geopolitical status is rising rapidly, alongside its economic might, the US continues to squander its global leadership, owing to the unchecked greed of its political and economic elites and the self-made trap of perpetual war in the Middle East.
According to the IMF, China’s GDP will be $17.6 trillion in 2014, outstripping US output of $17.4 trillion.
Of course, because China’s population is more than four times larger, its per capita GDP, at $12,900, is still less than a quarter of the $54,700 recorded in the US, which highlights America’s much higher living standards.
China’s rise is momentous, but it also signifies a return.
After all, China has been the world’s most populous country since it became a unified state more than 2,000 years ago, so it makes sense that it would also be the world’s largest economy.
And, indeed, the evidence suggests that China was larger (in terms of purchasing power parity) than any other economy in the world until around 1889, when the US eclipsed it.
Now, 125 years later, the rankings have reversed again, following decades of rapid economic development in China.
African leaders view China as their countries’ new indispensable growth partner, particularly in infrastructure and business development.
Similarly, economic strategists and business leaders in Latin America now look to China at least as much as they look to the US.
China and Japan seem to be taking steps toward better relations, after a period of high tensions.
Even Russia has recently “tilted” toward China, establishing stronger connections on many fronts, including energy and transport.
Like the US after World War II, China is putting real money on the table – a lot of it – to build strong economic and infrastructure links with countries around the world.
This will enable other countries to boost their own growth, while cementing China’s global economic and geopolitical leadership.
In just the past year, China has launched four major projects that promise to give it a greatly expanded role in global trade and finance.
China joined Russia, Brazil, India, and South Africa in establishing the New Development Bank, to be based in Shanghai.
A new Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, to be based in Beijing, will help to fund infrastructure projects (roads, power, and rail, among others) throughout the region.
The New Silk Road land belt seeks to connect China with the economies of East Asia, South Asia, Central Asia, and Europe through an expanded grid of rail, highways, power, fiber, and other networks.
And the new 21st Century Maritime Silk Road is aimed at boosting ocean-based trade in East Asia and the Indian Ocean.
All told, these various initiatives are likely to leverage hundreds of billions of dollars in investment over the coming decade, speeding growth in the counterpart countries while deepening their production, trade, and financial linkages with China.
China faces huge internal challenges, including high and rising income inequality, massive air and water pollution, the need to move to a low-carbon economy, and the same risks of financial-market instabilities that bedevil the US and Europe.
And if China becomes too aggressive toward its neighbors – for example, by demanding rights to offshore oil or territory in disputed waters – it will generate a serious diplomatic backlash.
No one should assume smooth sailing for China (or for any other part of the world, for that matter) in the years ahead.
Still, it is striking that just as China is rising economically and geopolitically, the US seems to be doing everything possible to waste its own economic, technological, and geopolitical advantages.
The US political system has been captured by the greed of its wealthy elites, whose narrow goals are to cut corporate and personal tax rates, maximize their vast personal fortunes, and curtail constructive US leadership in global economic development.
They so scorn US foreign assistance that they have thrown open the doors to China’s new global leadership in development financing.
Even worse, as China flexes its geopolitical muscles, the only foreign policy that the US systematically pursues is unceasing and fruitless war in the Middle East.
The US endlessly drains its resources and energy in Syria and Iraq in the same way that it once did in Vietnam.
China, meanwhile, has avoided becoming enmeshed in overseas military debacles, emphasizing win-win economic initiatives instead.
China’s economic rise can contribute to global wellbeing if its leaders emphasize investment in infrastructure, clean energy, public health, and other international priorities.
Still, the world would be better off if the US also continued to lead constructively, alongside China.
The recent announcement by Presidents Barack Obama and Xi Jinping of bilateral agreements on climate change and clean energy show the best of what’s possible.
CALGARY – When Harvey Cushing and William Bovie introduced electrocautery (which uses a high-frequency current to seal blood vessels or make incisions) in 1926, their innovation transformed neurosurgery.
Given the precision required to operate on an organ as delicate as the brain, the convergence of mechanical technologies with the art of surgery catalyzed progress in the field.
As in any other surgical field, the less the procedure interferes with the body, the less likely it is to affect the patient’s quality of life adversely, and the sooner the patient will be able to return to normal activity.
Tasks like maneuvering small blood vessels that are 1-2 millimeters in diameter, or removing a brain tumor without damaging the surrounding tissue, require technologies, such as the operating microscope and multimodal imaging tools, that complement surgeons’ skills and augment their abilities.
A step further would be to allow a human-controlled robot to enter the brain.
Robots are capable of performing repetitive tasks with a higher degree of precision and accuracy than are humans, and without muscle fatigue.
Given that comprehending – and reacting appropriately to – the immense number of variables that can arise during surgery would require enormous computing power, surgical robots aim to integrate human experience and decision-making ability with mechanized accuracy.
One example of this convergence is neuroArm, developed by my research team at the University of Calgary in conjunction with engineers at MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates.
The neuroArm actually has two arms, which can hold various surgical tools while the surgeon maneuvers them from a remote workstation.
The workstation provides a multitude of data – including magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a three-dimensional image of the surgical field, sonic information, and quantifiable haptic (or tactile) feedback from tool-tissue interaction – that enable the surgeon to experience the surgery through sight, sound, and touch.
Because the human brain makes decisions based on sensory input – and, of course, experience – such data are essential for the surgeon to make the most informed choices possible during surgery.
Technologies like MRI can help in surgical planning, resection control, and quality assurance.
Magnetic-resonance-compatible robotics allow for real-time imaging, providing information about anatomical structures and changes in the brain relative to surgical pathology while operating, thereby minimizing risk.
Given that the robot receives the MRIs and provides haptic feedback, electronic highways or surgical corridors can be established before the procedure, as can “no-go” zones.
Tool manipulation can thus occur only within the predetermined corridor, preventing unintended injury to the brain.
Furthermore, robotic surgery has the potential to progress beyond the scope of unaided human capability.
Motion scaling – which allows the robotic arms to mimic the exact movements of the surgeon’s hands, but on a much smaller scale – will enable surgeons to manipulate tissue that is too small for the naked eye to detect.
With the development of smaller microsurgical tools and high-performance cameras and monitors, operating at the cellular level will be possible.
Building on simulation technology, virtual reality will allow surgeons to rehearse procedures, including with surgical robots, in a digital environment.
The ability to map out complex cases and practice rare procedures before performing them on a patient will undoubtedly lead to better surgical performance and improved medical outcomes.
Virtual reality will also enhance surgical training, by providing students with a wider range of experience and enabling quantification of their performance.
Surgeons operating manually know how much force they exert only by the way it feels; a surgical simulator, by contrast, could measure that force and indicate when a trainee is applying excessive or insufficient pressure.
Moreover, instructors will be able to program controlled scenarios to assess how a trainee copes in challenging circumstances.
The ability to reset and retry surgeries without any risk or additional cost will enhance neurosurgical training significantly.
Given that realistic neurosurgical simulations, which must account for a large number of variables and potential outcomes, are particularly difficult to develop, virtual reality is not yet being used widely in the field.
But surgical-simulation technology is advancing rapidly, bolstered by developments in parallel computing.
The merging of human surgical experience with machines and computerized technologies is driving neurosurgical advancement, with robotic surgery serving as an important model of the benefits of the human-machine interface.
Add virtual reality to the equation and the future of neurosurgery takes shape – a future in which the discipline is elevated to new levels of excellence.
OSAKA – Yesterday’s landslide general-election victory by the Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ) terminated the one-party-dominated system that the catch-all Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) has controlled almost without interruption since 1955.
For most of the last decade, the DPJ was not seen as a viable alternative to the LDP, although they appeared to form a pseudo-two-party system.
Twenty years after the Cold War’s end, Japan will at last have a post-Cold War system of government.
The Japanese public, even now, remains uncertain about the DPJ’s ability to govern and is skeptical of its rosy programs of wealth redistribution, which lack solid funding.
The public is also fully aware that the ideologically fragmented DPJ lacks a pragmatic, coherent foreign and security policy
Yet the DPJ will form the next government because of public disgust with the LDP.
For the last four years, the LDP had shown itself to be utterly unresponsive to the key issues of popular concern: pensions, unemployment, and the fraying social safety net.
Moreover, the LDP was plagued by a string of minor scandals and consistent bungling.
The LDP’s need for three different prime ministers in the space of little more than a year made plain that the party’s power nucleus had melted down.
Once in power, the DPJ will immediately confront the massive bureaucracy and entrenched mandarins, which usually sabotage any efforts at administrative reform that threatens their power and vested interests.
Indeed, immediately after the election, the budget estimates for the next fiscal year are due.
The figures that will be presented are the result of a lengthy process, in which the bureaucracy closely consulted with LDP.
So, without breaking the regular budget cycle, the DPJ will be forced to implement not only the supplementary budget drawn up by the LDP, but will also be stuck with next year’s budget, which embodies LDP policies that the DPJ has denounced.
As a result, the DPJ has announced plans to revoke the LDP’s guidelines for a ceiling on budget requests so as to formulate its own budget from scratch.
But time is short, and few of new DPJ lawmakers possess the legislative experience and budgetary expertise to make that happen.
To gain control of the mandarins, the DPJ plans to place 100 lawmakers in the ministries’ top leadership, as well as three dozen political appointees to policy staffs in the office of the prime minister.
Unfortunately, the DPJ scrapped an LDP-sponsored civil-service reform bill, which would have allowed the DPJ to replace mandarins with an army of political appointees.
The DPJ, despite its manifesto, seems unprepared to tame the mandarins, and so may be forced to rely on them.
The ascendency of the mandarins is a legacy of Japan’s unique historical development dating back to its early modern period.
Indeed, full-fledged “society”-building started only after the 1868 Meiji Restoration, which tipped the balance of power definitively in favor of the state.
As a result, the mandarins survived WWII and the postwar American occupation relatively undamaged, and they will strive to survive the DPJ government as well.
LDP lawmakers and mandarins developed a routine in which mandarins drafted cabinet-sponsored bills, LDP lawmakers checked the bills, and the two together finalized legislative drafts before they were introduced to the Diet (parliament).
Since the LDP, recently with a coalition partner, controlled the Diet, the legislative process was simply the interaction between LDP lawmakers and mandarins, centered in the LDP’s headquarters.
Indeed, under the LDP-led one-party-dominant system, this extra-constitutional mechanism became an integral part of Japan’s government polity.
The DPJ government will collide head-on with the mandarins, partly because the party will find it hard to recruit sufficiently qualified policymakers.
The mandarins have maintained their privileged position in this regard, owing partly to the tax system, which prevents the emergence of non-profit institutions, especially think tanks, where independent policy expertise can be forged.
Moreover, perhaps in anticipation of a change in power, the mandarins have moved forward the annual personnel changes in the major ministries’ top administrative positions.
Having fallen from power, it will lose its control of the redistribution of government funds.
Unable to pay off its constituencies, disintegration looms, for the LDP has never been a party with entrenched grass-roots support, but instead operates as a machine of power and redistribution through a web of insiders across the country’s industrial sectors, occupational associations, and local communities.
Only by recruiting new blood and reorganizing itself with a solid ideological platform will an LDP comeback be possible.
The DPJ has even weaker grass-roots support, so the mandarins will most likely use their standard techniques of divide and rule to cajole the party by teaching it to mimic the LDP in using state money and contracts to underwrite its major constituencies, such as labor unions and other interest groups.
If the DPJ can break free of mandarin control by centralizing policy formation in the office of the prime minister, as it intends, Japan can emerge as a more resilient democracy with a full-fledged two-party system and greater willingness to assume an international leadership role.
BERLIN – If the world is to avoid climate catastrophe, it will have to forego burning almost 90% of proven coal reserves, plus one-third of oil and half of natural-gas reserves.
But instead of implementing policies aimed at realizing that objective, governments continue not only to subsidize the fossil-fuel industry, but also to use scarce public resources to find new reserves.
In an effort to help spur that change, the Heinrich Böll Foundation and Friends of the Earth International have aggregated key data about the coal industry in the just-released Coal Atlas.
According to the International Monetary Fund, post-tax subsidies for coal (including environmental damage) reached 3.9 % of global GDP this year.
G-20 governments are estimated to spend $88 billion per year on exploration subsidies for new fossil fuels.
And a recent report by the Natural Resources Defense Council, Oil Change International, and the World Wide Fund for Nature revealed that from 2007 to 2014, governments channeled more than $73 billion – or over $9 billion per year – of public money toward coal projects.
Leading the way were Japan ($20 billion), China (around $15 billion), South Korea ($7 billion), and Germany ($6.8 billion).
In 2013, 92 leading banks provided at least €66 billion ($71 billion) – over four times more than in 2005.
All of this has gone to buttress an industry that produces a massive share of global emissions – and seems dead set on continuing to do so.
Since 1988, just 35 coal producers, both private and state-owned, have contributed one-third of total CO2 emissions.
And yet coal and other fossil-fuel companies have refused to adjust their business models.
Instead, they have actively worked to block efforts to mitigate climate change at the national and international levels, including by funding climate-change deniers and lobbying against renewable-energy targets and successful instruments like feed-in tariffs.
Meanwhile, the coal industry argues that it plays an indispensable role in tackling “energy poverty” – that is, the lack of access to modern non-polluting forms of power, primarily electricity.
It is true that energy poverty is a huge problem, affecting some 1.2 billion people worldwide.
For farmers, who must rely on pumped water to irrigate their crops, this means lower efficiency and productivity.
For households, which must burn firewood, cow dung, and kerosene to cook, it means indoor air pollution that can cause respiratory disease.
In 2013, Coal workers pneumoconiosis (“black lung disease”) resulted in more than 25,000 deaths globally.
In the European Union, coal combustion is responsible for 18,200 premature deaths and 8,500 new cases of chronic bronchitis per year.
In China, an estimated 250,000 people die prematurely because of coal combustion.
The physical toll carries large economic costs as well, from lost working days to pressure on health-care systems.
Climate change, too, will impose enormous costs, even if strong mitigation and adaptation measures are taken.
For the 48 least-developed countries, the costs of coal will soon amount to an estimated $50 billion per year.
Far from receiving subsidies, the fossil-fuel industry should be paying for climate change.
After all, just last year, the top two fossil-fuel companies – Chevron and ExxonMobil – together pulled in more than $50 billion in profits.
If the world is to have any chance of capping the increase in global surface temperature at 2° Celsius above pre-industrial levels, without being forced to employ dangerous and risky technologies like Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage or geo-engineering, its energy system must be transformed.
First and foremost, world leaders must commit to phasing out fossil fuels, with the explicit goal of leaving 90% of proven coal reserves, one-third of oil reserves, and half of gas reserves in the ground.
They must also end public subsidies for coal as soon as possible, within the next few years, while ensuring that poor and vulnerable communities do not suffer from an increase in energy prices.
Moreover, governments worldwide must hold coal and other fossil-fuel producers accountable for the damage their products have caused, including through a levy on fossil-fuel extraction to fund the Warsaw Mechanism on Loss and Damage under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
Existing international law – in particular, the “polluter pays” principle, the “no-harm” rule, and the right to compensation – supports such a system.
Finally, to address energy poverty, world leaders must scale up funding for decentralized renewable-energy projects, including through a globally funded feed-in tariff for renewable energy mini-grids in developing countries.
The fossil-fuel industry’s success in safeguarding its own interests has come at the expense of the health of our planet and its people.
It is time to reform our perverse global energy system – beginning by resolving to leave coal and other fossil fuels where they are.
NEW YORK – Tens of thousands of people have been “occupying” the tear-gas-filled streets of Hong Kong’s Central district to fight for their democratic rights.
Though some businessmen and bankers are annoyed by the disruption, the demonstrators are right to protest.
China’s government has promised Hong Kong’s citizens that they can freely elect their Chief Executive in 2017.
But, given that candidates are to be carefully vetted by an unelected committee of pro-Chinese appointees, citizens would have no meaningful choice at all.
Only people who “love China” – that is, love the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) – need apply.
One can almost understand why China’s leaders should be baffled by this show of defiance in Hong Kong.
After all, the British simply appointed governors when Hong Kong was still a crown colony, and nobody protested then.
Indeed, the deal that Hong Kong’s colonial subjects appeared to accept – leaving politics alone in exchange for the opportunity to pursue material prosperity in a safe and orderly environment – is not so different from the deal accepted by China’s educated classes today.
The common opinion among British colonial civil servants, businessmen, and diplomats was that the Chinese were not really interested in politics anyway; all they cared about was money.
Anyone with the slightest knowledge of Chinese history knows that this view was patently false.
But, for a long time, it seemed to be true in Hong Kong.
There was, however, a significant difference between Hong Kong under the British and under China today.
Hong Kong was never a democracy, but it did have a relatively free press, a relatively honest government, and an independent judiciary – all backed by a democratic government in London.
For most Hong Kong citizens, the prospect of being handed over in 1997 from one colonial power to another was never an entirely happy one.
But what really invigorated politics in Hong Kong was the brutal crackdown in Beijing’s Tiananmen Square and in other Chinese cities in 1989.
Huge demonstrations took place in Hong Kong to protest the massacre, and massive commemorations of the event are held every June, keeping alive a memory that is repressed and fading in the rest of China.
It was not simply humanitarian rage that galvanized so many people in Hong Kong to act in 1989.
They recognized then that under future Chinese rule, only genuine democracy might safeguard the institutions that protected Hong Kong’s freedoms.
Without any significant say in how they were to be governed, Hong Kong’s citizens would be at the mercy of China’s leaders.
From the point of view of China’s Communist rulers, this seems perverse.
They regard Hong Kongers’ democratic demands as a misguided effort to mimic Western politics, or even as a form of nostalgia for British imperialism.
The way China’s rulers see it, only firm control from the top and the CCP’s unquestioned supremacy can create the conditions needed for a rich and powerful China to emerge.
Democracy, in their view, leads to disorder; freedom of thought causes popular “confusion”; and public criticism of the Party tends toward the breakdown of authority.
But, though Chinese government always was authoritarian, it was not always as corrupt as it is now.
China traditionally had institutions – clan associations, religious communities, business groups, and so on – that were relatively autonomous.
Imperial rule may have been authoritarian, but there were large pockets of independence from central control.
In that sense, Hong Kong is perhaps more traditional than the rest of China, excluding, of course, Taiwan.
Today, the CCP’s political supremacy places it above the law, which encourages corruption among Party officials, whether at the local or national level.
Strict Party control of religious, academic, artistic, and journalistic expression stifles the dissemination of necessary information and creative thought.
When Hong Kong was formally handed back to China 17 years ago, some optimists thought that the former colony’s greater freedoms would help to reform the rest of China.
The example of a clean bureaucracy and independent judges would strengthen the rule of law throughout the country.
Others, for the same reason, regarded Hong Kong as a dangerous Trojan horse that could seriously undermine the Communist order.
So far, there is no evidence that the protesters in Hong Kong’s Central district have any ambition to undermine, let alone topple, the government in Beijing.
They have their hands full just standing up for their own rights in Hong Kong, and the chance that they will succeed appears to be slim.
His aim seems to be to make Hong Kong more like the rest of China, rather than the other way round.
And yet, there is every reason to believe that China would benefit greatly from the opposite course.
Less official corruption, more trust in the law, and greater freedom of thought would make China a more stable, more creative, and even more prosperous society.
But the people who truly “love China” are more likely to be found in the streets of Hong Kong than in the closed government compounds of Beijing.
NEW YORK – Stories are most believable when they reaffirm our prior beliefs and assumptions.
A case in point is Eduardo Galeano’s much-admired 1971 book The Open Veins of Latin America, which has sold more than one million copies in 12 languages and defined a generation’s view of the region’s tortured history.
The late Hugo Chávez gave US President Barack Obama a copy when they met in 2009 in Trinidad.
The book is commendable for its ability to describe five centuries of Latin American history with great coherence, something that only a work of fiction can achieve.
A few weeks ago, Galeano, to the astonishment of many, distanced himself from his own book.
He said he could no longer bear reading it, and that when he wrote it, he “lacked sufficient knowledge of economics and politics.”
Why was the book so well received, and what accounts for its author’s second thoughts?
Galeano’s book interprets Latin America’s history as the consequence of foreign plunder.
Over the centuries, bad guys change nationality – say, from Spanish to American – but their intentions remain the same.
Current problems are the result of evil deeds committed by foreign powers that came only to exploit.
Throughout human history, those with superior technology have tended to displace or even annihilate their neighbors.
That is why the Welsh and the Pygmies live in remote places, and why English, Spanish, and Portuguese are spoken in the Americas.
In fact, recent scientific evidence indicates that the Neolithic Revolution – the transition from hunting and gathering to agriculture – spread mostly because farmers displaced hunters, not because hunters learned from them.
But, while technological superiority and confrontation can wipe out the weak side, technological diffusion across cultures can be mutually beneficial.
It allows all to do more with less, thereby generating a surplus that can be distributed.
As in any such relationship, all parties want to get the lion’s share of the gain, but some get the short end of the stick.
The real challenge for a patriot is to obtain the largest amount of pie, not a large share of a small pie.
Alas, those inspired by Open Veins, like Chávez (and Fidel Castro before him), are bound to create very small pies.
For example, while Chávez’s intention was to double Venezuela’s oil production to six million barrels per day by 2012 – a feasible goal, given that the country has the world’s largest oil reserves – his penchant for expropriation and for firing able dissenters caused output to fall by one-fifth.
While Venezuela remains mired in economic malaise, its allies – China, Russia, Brazil, and OPEC – have raised output by 14 million barrels per day, laughing all the way to the bank.
But to tell the story of Latin America as one of foreign pillage is to ignore the benefits that the region has gained from foreign efforts, especially in Venezuela.
Once upon a time, in ancient Mesopotamia, oil was known to exist and it was peddled by some quacks for its medicinal powers.
Around 1870, John D. Rockefeller spearheaded the development of the modern oil industry to produce kerosene for lighting.
Later, while he was in a ferocious confrontation with Thomas Edison, who was threatening Rockefeller’s business with the electric bulb, unrelated technological developments led to the gasoline-powered internal combustion engine and to the idea of putting it on wheels.
This soon made oil the preferred energy source for transportation, not lighting, and even for electricity generation.
Then it had to be extracted, refined into more useful products, and transported cheaply.
All of that required a plethora of breakthroughs in geology, metallurgy, material science, chemical engineering, cars, roads, cities, rules, and other areas.
While this was happening, many of today’s large oil producers – including Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, Iran, and Nigeria – were missing in action.
For the most part, they did not know that they had oil or where it was.
They did not know about seismic lines, drilling, pipelines, refineries, or tankers.
More important, they did not do much to construct the complex ecosystem that makes oil valuable.
They did, however, have the right to restrict access to their underground resources in order to extract rents, just as the despised agricultural landowners have done for centuries.
They could become rentiers and live off the work and ingenuity of others.
The chutzpah of Open Veins and Chávez is to describe their situation as victimhood, not good fortune.
Similar stories can be told of other industries, even those that do not require natural resources but rely on global value chains instead.
In developing countries, economic progress requires absorbing and adapting technology that exists in other places, which necessitates engaging with those that have it.
By characterizing these interactions as pure exploitation, rather than as value-creating opportunities, the Open Veins mentality has been a real drain on the possibilities of so many in Latin America and elsewhere.
The credit boom of the past decade highlighted the inadequacy of focusing only on prices, and underscored the need for the monetary authority of a country (or group of countries in the case of the European Central Bank and the eurozone) to monitor the financial sector.
Macroprudential regulation is the new term of art among central bankers, supplementing their well-established inflation-targeting regimes.
This shift in focus could radically change monetary policy, but for better or worse?
The Bank of England may be blazing the way in this transition, but the ECB and the United States Federal Reserve Board are taking on more financial regulation as well.
Indeed, the ECB’s European Systemic Risk Board serves a function that is similar to the United Kingdom’s new Financial Policy Committee (FPC).
At the end of a recent discussion with Andy Haldane, the Bank of England’s Executive Director for Financial Stability and a member of the FPC, I asked: What happens if inflation is high and lending is low?
Under this scenario, the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) would favor an increase in interest rates, while the FPC would want to loosen monetary conditions.
I am still pondering the question that I posed to Haldane, because the potential for such contradictory policy imperatives appears unavoidable – never more so than now.
The last decade – until the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 – was known as the Great Moderation, a period of low inflation and strong growth that reflected major new developments, such as global integration of emerging markets and major central banks’ adoption of inflation-targeting regimes during the 1990’s.
In the United Kingdom, the Bank of England was made independent in 1997, and given a target of 2% annual inflation.
Price stability during the 2000’s explained the low interest rates that supported strong growth.
But, it also meant that a credit boom with international dimensions was not monitored, resulting in the most spectacular bust of modern times, including the near collapse of the banking system.
Amid the UK’s institutional changes in 1997, financial regulation was put in the hands of the Financial Services Authority (FSA).
But the FSA is soon to be replaced by the FPC, resulting in a system that aims to avoid an “underlap” of authority that leaves no one in charge.
The FPC is now part of the Bank of England, which is meant somehow to ensure that monetary policy takes into account the financial sector.
The change reflects central bankers’ argument that to target credit or liquidity requires another tool.
Interest rates are too blunt an instrument, and risk damaging the wider economy when used to prick a housing bubble, as recent research by BOE Deputy Governor Charlie Bean has shown.
So the FPC would wield instruments such as capital ratios or loan-to-value ratios to manage liquidity, and placing two instruments for two targets – liquidity and inflation – within the BOE would ensure coordination.
During the pre-crisis Great Moderation, restraining lending through regulatory tools probably would have worked, because it was unlikely to push the economy into deflation, as hiking interest rates would have done.
The current issue is that the monetary aggregate (M4) measure of lending to the private sector is at its lowest level in a decade, while inflation is more than double the BOE’s target.
If the FPC lowers capital requirements to encourage lending, but the MPC raises rates to cope with inflation, banks would face competing pressures.
Because both the FPC and the MPC rely on a monetary-transmission mechanism that operates through banks, it isn’t clear that inflation-targeting and liquidity maintenance can be so neatly separated.
The idea is that countries would coordinate counter-cyclical regulatory measures, thereby preventing capital from skirting them by moving across borders.
But, what if – and this is very likely – business cycles are not coordinated?
After all, China is tightening credit while the UK is encouraging more of it.
Closer to Britain, the ECB is potentially embarking on a tightening cycle and withdrawing hundreds of billions of euros in liquidity provided during the crisis, owing to concerns about “addicted” banks.
Will it really loosen capital requirements in order to align itself with the BOE?
Again, such policies would have worked a decade ago, in an environment of low inflation and rapid lending growth.
But times have changed, and monetary policy will, of course, shift accordingly.
The problem is that if bodies like the FPC become as important to central banks as monetary policy committees, we may be left wondering which target takes precedence when they clash.
CAMBRIDGE – Why has the US Federal Reserve’s policy of quantitative easing been so much more successful than the version of QE implemented by the European Central Bank?
That intellectual question leads directly to a practical one: Will the ECB ever be able to translate quantitative easing into stronger economic growth and higher inflation?
The Fed introduced quantitative easing – buying large quantities of long-term bonds and promising to keep short-term interest rates low for a prolonged period – after it concluded that the US economy was not responding adequately to traditional monetary policy and to the fiscal stimulus package enacted in 2009.
The Fed’s chairman at the time, Ben Bernanke, reasoned that unconventional monetary policy would drive down long-term rates, inducing investors to shift from high-quality bonds to equities and other risky securities.
This would drive up the value of those assets, increasing household wealth and therefore consumer spending.
Share prices rose 30% in 2013 alone, and house prices increased 13% in the same twelve months.
As a result, the net worth of households increased by $10 trillion that year.
The rise in wealth induced consumers to increase spending, which restarted the usual expansionary multiplier process, with GDP up by 2.5% in 2013 and the unemployment rate falling from 8% to 6.7%.
The expansion continued in subsequent years, bringing the current unemployment rate down to 5% – and the unemployment rate among college graduates to just 2.5%.
The ECB has been following a similar strategy of large-scale asset purchases and extremely low (indeed negative) short-term interest rates.
But, although the policy is the same as the Fed’s, its purpose is very different.
Because Europe lacks the widespread share ownership that exists in the United States, quantitative easing cannot be used to stimulate consumer spending by raising household wealth.
Instead, a major if unspoken purpose of the ECB’s low-interest-rate policy has been to stimulate net exports by depressing the value of the euro.
The ECB succeeded in this, with the euro’s value falling by some 25% – from $1.40 in the summer of 2014 to $1.06 by the fall of 2015.
I have been an advocate of reducing the value of the euro for several years, so I think this strategy was a good one.
But, although the fall in the value of the euro has stimulated the eurozone’s net exports, the impact on its members’ exports and GDP has been quite limited.
One reason for this is that much of the eurozone countries’ trade is with other eurozone countries that use the same currency.
Moreover, exports to the US don’t benefit much from the decline of the euro-dollar exchange rate.
European exporters generally invoice their exports in dollars and adjust their dollar prices very slowly, a point made clear in an important paper that Gita Gopinath of Harvard presented at the Federal Reserve’s Jackson Hole conference in August 2015.
As a result, total net exports from the eurozone rose less than €3 billion ($3.2 billion) between September 2014 and September 2015 – a negligible amount in an €11 trillion economy.
A further motive of the ECB’s bond purchases has been to increase the cash that eurozone banks have available to lend to businesses and households.
But, as of now, there has been very little increase in such lending.
Finally, the ECB is eager to raise the eurozone inflation rate to its target of just under 2%.
In the US, the QE strategy has increased the “core” inflation rate – which excludes the direct effect of declining prices of energy and food – to 2.1% over the past 12 months.
This has been a by-product of the increase in real demand, achieved by reducing unemployment to a level at which rising wages contribute to faster price growth.
This strategy is unlikely to work in the eurozone, because the unemployment rate is still nearly 12%, about five percentage points higher than it was before the recession began.
The ECB’s quantitative easing policy can probably achieve higher inflation only through the increase in import prices resulting from a decline in the value of the euro.
ECB President Mario Draghi recently responded to the new evidence of eurozone weakness and super-low inflation by indicating that the Bank is likely to ease monetary conditions further at its next policy-setting meeting in March.
This could mean further reducing already-negative short-term interest rates and expanding and/or extending its bond-purchase program.
Long-term interest rates fell, equity prices rose, and the euro declined relative to the dollar.
But past experience and the reasons spelled out here suggest that these policies will do very little to increase real activity and price inflation in the eurozone.
To make real progress toward reviving their economies, the individual countries need to depend less on quantitative easing by the ECB and focus squarely on structural reforms and fiscal stimulus.
Instead, I am stuck here in Gaza, in my father’s house inside the Jabalia refugee camp, with few options and no way out.
Gaza cries out for bone specialists, but the training I need is available only abroad.
When I won a place at a medical college in Germany, my parents were proud.
I wasted no time in asking the Israeli authorities for permission to travel to Europe.
But I was told that only patients in need of emergency medical evacuation would be allowed out – not students.
Hundreds of other young people trapped in the Gaza Strip have won admission to study abroad.
Gaza is one of the most densely populated places on earth, and one of the poorest – 1.5 million of us live on a patch of land about 41 kilometers long and 6-12 kilometers wide.
The local hospitals lack the equipment needed to perform many important procedures, like radiation treatments for cancer patients and heart surgery.
Many subjects are not even taught, and there are few post-graduate programs.
In June, after the United States pressured Israel to allow Fulbright scholarship winners to leave the Gaza Strip, the Israeli military announced that it would grant exit permits for a few more students with “recognized” scholarships – but not “hundreds.”
So hundreds of us are still waiting, most without prestigious scholarships to draw the world’s attention.
I am sure to be one of the many who will not be allowed to leave.
We returned to Palestine in 1996 from Saudi Arabia, where my father had been working as a teacher.
My parents put their hope in the Oslo Accords signed in 1993, and decided that they could give us a better life here.
During my third year of high school, the Israeli authorities closed off the Gaza Strip.
Israeli border controls have reduced the flow of people crossing the border to a trickle, and have suffocated Gaza’s economy, choking off imports and exports and cutting fuel deliveries and electricity.
There is no clothing left in my father’s shop, which was supposed to support my brother and me during our studies.
With the backing of the US, Canada, and the European Union, Israel has maintained its blockade in an attempt to defeat Hamas, which won the elections here in 2006.
Hamas and other armed groups, I know, have launched rocket attacks from the Gaza Strip that have killed civilians in Israeli towns and villages.
But I also have witnessed how Israel has retaliated with air strikes and armed incursions into the Gaza Strip, including Jabalia.
It is also destroying my dream to write “Specialist in Bone Medicine” after my name.
But my hope is still to go abroad, learn skills, and return to help others here.
Sometimes, when there is electricity, I watch television and see how people live in other places.
I ask myself why they have the opportunity to travel, to study, to take vacations, when I cannot go abroad even to learn medicine.
When they do, I will probably still be here in my father’s house, waiting for the blockade to end.
In 1974, I published a paper entitled "The genetics of Caenorhabditis elegans ," also known as the nematode.
Its first sentence read: "How genes might specify the complex structures found in higher organisms is a major unsolved problem of biology."
Has our slowness in finding out been due to our difficulties in choosing the right organism to study?
Until the early 1960's, biology's great-unanswered question was far more modest: how does DNA determine the simplest of proteins?
But then it became clear that all you have to do is get a gene and sequence it, get a protein and sequence it, and simply translate one into the other.
In principle, we could learn what genes do just by reading their chemical language.
We did have primitive tools to sequence proteins, so we could figure out their chemistry.
All we could do was follow the standard--and painfully slow--procedure established by Gregor Mendel, the 19 th Century founder of genetics.
According to Mendel, a gene's presence in an organism is confirmed only when we find an alternative form of it, called an allele .
For example, Mendel could not say that there was a gene for tallness in a plant species until he discovered dwarf mutants of the same species.
With the discovery of genetic recombination in viruses that penetrate rapidly reproducing bacteria, it became possible to measure variation in offspring much more minutely, and thus to dissect the fine structure of a gene.
So it was natural by this point for biologists to ask whether a similar approach would crack the genetics of more complex, multi-cellular organisms.
The rule from the earlier research on bacteria was to obtain mutants and study them as deeply as possible.
This would provide us with lots of genetic variation, enabling us to analyze the genes fully.
I was interested in the nervous system, and thought it important to study it in a way that it could be summarized in the form of a wiring diagram.
The plan was not to trace genes directly to behavior, but to separate the problem into two questions: a developmental question ("how do genes build nervous systems?"), and a physiological question ("how do nervous systems or brains generate behavior?").
The idea was to study mutants of C. elegans in the hope of finding mutants of genes that regulate behavior.
But even in an organism as simple as C. elegans , our technological limits made it extremely difficult to pinpoint the function of genes.
We started by studying muscle, simply because it gave us large amounts of proteins.
The invention in the mid-1970's of technology to clone and sequence DNA opened new vistas for research, and its use on humans and other mammals has been enormously successful in terms of scientific discovery.
But the development of genetics has remained dependent on the ability to study model organisms like C. elegans and Drosophila (the fruit fly).
In fact, the great risk nowadays is that with so many genetic descriptions of organisms pouring out, we are drowning in a sea of data but are moving further away from understanding biological complexity.
The basic functional units of all complex living organisms, it should be remembered, are cells , not genes.
What we need now are cell maps and maps of how cells talk to each other.
Our first job is to say how many different cells there are in a complex organism.
This brings us to the need to reflect on human beings--not just the human genome--as subjects for biological research.
This struck me recently while I was attending a meeting on the mouse, which is a model for human beings.
The meeting proposed that we create a genetically mixed pool of 30,000 mice.
We would train people to go around examining these mice and diagnose high blood pressure, diabetes, greed, and so forth.
Then we would study the genotypes of these mice--the particular variants of their genes.
The problem is that we are technologically incapable of mapping 30,000 genotypes.
But it occurred to me that even if one could map 30,000 genotypes, why would one work on a mouse?
After all, we already have many highly trained people to examine subjects, namely physicians.
So, when technology permits (and I think it can and will), why don't we work directly on humans?
The right way to do this would be to work with a population where everybody is anonymous.
We can prove that we understand the genetic structure of a human disease by synthesizing the same disease in a mouse.
But the very purpose of using model organisms is to confirm what we find in the real thing.
CAMBRIDGE – Many, if not all, of the world’s most pressing macroeconomic problems relate to the massive overhang of all forms of debt.
In Europe, a toxic combination of public, bank, and external debt in the periphery threatens to unhinge the eurozone.
Across the Atlantic, a standoff between the Democrats, the Tea Party, and old-school Republicans has produced extraordinary uncertainty about how the United States will close its 8%-of-GDP government deficit over the long term.
Japan, meanwhile is running a 10%-of-GDP budget deficit, even as growing cohorts of new retirees turn from buying Japanese bonds to selling them.
One extreme is the simplistic Keynesian remedy that assumes that government deficits don’t matter when the economy is in deep recession; indeed, the bigger the better.
At the opposite extreme are the debt-ceiling absolutists who want governments to start balancing their budgets tomorrow (if not yesterday).
The debt-ceiling absolutists grossly underestimate the massive adjustment costs of a self-imposed “sudden stop” in debt finance.
Such costs are precisely why impecunious countries such as Greece face massive social and economic displacement when financial markets lose confidence and capital flows suddenly dry up.
Of course, there is an appealing logic to saying that governments should have to balance their budgets just like the rest of us; unfortunately, it is not so simple.
Governments typically have myriad ongoing expenditure commitments related to basic services such as national defense, infrastructure projects, education, and health care, not to mention to retirees.
When US President Ronald Reagan took office on January 20, 1981, he retroactively rescinded all civil-service job offers extended by the government during the two and a half months between his election and the inauguration.
The signal that he intended to slow down government spending was a powerful one, but the immediate effect on the budget was negligible.
Of course, a government can also close a budget gap by raising taxes, but any sudden shift can significantly magnify the distortions that taxes cause.
If the debt-ceiling absolutists are naïve, so, too, are simplistic Keynesians.
They see lingering post-financial-crisis unemployment as a compelling justification for much more aggressive fiscal expansion, even in countries already running massive deficits, such as the US and the United Kingdom.
People who disagree with them are said to favor “austerity” at a time when hyper-low interest rates mean that governments can borrow for almost nothing.
It is quite right to argue that governments should aim only to balance their budgets over the business cycle, running surpluses during booms and deficits when economic activity is weak.
But it is wrong to think that massive accumulation of debt is a free lunch.
In a series of academic papers with Carmen Reinhart – including, most recently, joint work with Vincent Reinhart (“Debt Overhangs: Past and Present”) – we find that very high debt levels of 90% of GDP are a long-term secular drag on economic growth that often lasts for two decades or more.
The average high-debt episodes since 1800 last 23 years and are associated with a growth rate more than one percentage point below the rate typical for periods of lower debt levels.
That is, after a quarter-century of high debt, income can be 25% lower than it would have been at normal growth rates.
Of course, there is two-way feedback between debt and growth, but normal recessions last only a year and cannot explain a two-decade period of malaise.
The drag on growth is more likely to come from the eventual need for the government to raise taxes, as well as from lower investment spending.
So, yes, government spending provides a short-term boost, but there is a trade-off with long-run secular decline.
It is sobering to note that almost half of high-debt episodes since 1800 are associated with low or normal real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates.
Japan’s slow growth and low interest rates over the past two decades are emblematic.
Moreover, carrying a huge debt burden runs the risk that global interest rates will rise in the future, even absent a Greek-style meltdown.
This is particularly the case today, when, after sustained massive “quantitative easing” by major central banks, many governments have exceptionally short maturity structures for their debt.
Thus, they run the risk that a spike in interest rates would feed back relatively quickly into higher borrowing costs.
With many of today’s advanced economies near or approaching the 90%-of-GDP level that loosely marks high-debt periods, expanding today’s already large deficits is a risky proposition, not the cost-free strategy that simplistic Keynesians advocate.
I will focus in the coming months on the related problems of high private debt and external debts, and I will also return to the theme of why this is a time when elevated inflation is not so naïve.
Above all, voters and politicians must beware of seductively simple approaches to today’s debt problems.
BERLIN – The window of opportunity to complete the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) between the United States and the European Union is closing quickly.
National elections will be held this year and next in the US, France, and Germany, and the campaigns will play out in an environment that is increasingly hostile to international agreements in any form.
The biggest risk might come from the least likely source: Germany, an export powerhouse.
As it stands, some 70% of Germans citizens oppose the TTIP, almost twice the average in other European countries.
They overwhelmingly believe that Germany will not benefit economically, that lower-skill workers’ wages will suffer, that large corporations will gain power at the expense of consumers, that data and environmental protection will be compromised, and that citizens’ rights will be undermined.
But a slew of studies have proved all of these claims to be overblown or outright wrong.
In fact, Germany – whose economic progress since the end of World War II has been driven by its consistent openness to international trade and economic integration, and which remains one of Europe’s most open and trade-dependent economies – would be among the main beneficiaries of the TTIP.
It is projected that the TTIP would raise annual per capita income in Germany by 1-3%, or €300-1,000 per year by 2035.
Moreover, with nearly 50% of German jobs linked, directly or indirectly, to the tradable sector, the deal would also help protect employment.
And, by boosting the ability of the US and Europe to set global business standards, German firms’ international competitiveness would rise.
Not every individual or company stands to gain from the TTIP, but the net effect on Germany’s economy and citizens would be clearly positive.
One reason is that Germany’s apparent economic success has increased aversion to change.
The country not only endured the global financial crisis of 2008-2009 and the European sovereign debt crisis; it has actually thrived in recent years, experiencing robust GDP growth and impressive wage gains.
The unemployment rate has been halved since 2005, reaching a record low of 4.6% today, and its current-account surplus has soared to a staggering 8% of GDP.
The sense of being Europe’s economic superstar has generated policy inertia, bringing the country almost to a complete standstill on economic reforms.
While most other Europeans are desperately looking for any opportunity to pull their country out of crisis, Germans see little reason to meddle with an ostensibly prosperous status quo.
Unfortunately for Germany, its current path is not as smooth and secure as people like to think.
In fact, since its lost decade as the “sick man of Europe” in the 2000s, Germany has caught up with other advanced economies in only some areas.
It still has one of the lowest rates of public and private investment among OECD countries, and will be hit harder than most by a dramatic demographic shift over the next decade.
Beyond providing an immediate economic boost, the TTIP would help Germany weather the longer-term challenges it faces.
Germany’s opposition to the TTIP also reflects the recent surge in populist and nationalist sentiment in much of the Western world.
The appeal of such forces is particularly pronounced in the EU, owing to the popular perception that European integration has weakened national sovereignty and left citizens subject to decision-making by unelected technocrats.
The last thing many Europeans want is yet another set of supra-national rules, formulated behind closed doors, governing their economies.
This sentiment is especially acute for Germans, who remain bitter at, as they perceive it, having been Europe’s paymaster during the crisis.
Some now fear that the TTIP is just another trick, intended to take advantage of Germany’s economic strength and generosity.
A third reason for Germany’s opposition to the TTIP is that the country is already engaged in a battle for wealth redistribution.
Germany currently has the highest inequality in private wealth in the eurozone, and it has experienced a sharp increase in wage inequality over the last two decades.
Not only is the minimum wage widely circumvented; some politicians have capitalized on fears of the current influx of refugees to win votes, claiming that openness to foreigners will only make inequality worse.
Compounding Germans’ disillusionment is the sense – shared by many in Europe and elsewhere – that the system is “rigged.”
Volkswagen managers received huge bonuses this year, despite the global scandal caused by the company’s years-long effort to evade emissions standards.
And the release of the Panama Papers has revealed how the wealthiest avoid paying taxes.
Claims that the TTIP would benefit primarily the wealthy have thus struck a chord with labor unions and others.
A trade-dependent economy has much to gain from freer trade, especially with a market as large as the US.
Germany should be using its political clout to push its European counterparts to seal the deal.
Instead, with the popularity of the country’s two largest political parties, the Christian Democratic Union and the Social Democrats, falling fast, Germany’s leaders are unlikely to push an unpopular deal.
RANGOON – Across the Middle East, and now in Burma (Myanmar), one of the great questions of contemporary global politics has resurfaced: How can countries move from a failing authoritarianism to some form of self-sustaining pluralism?
Foreign ministers everywhere, in turn, face crucial policy questions: When a country launches such a political transition, when should other countries help, and what is the best way to do so?
Happy transitions, to paraphrase Tolstoy, are all alike; but every unhappy transition is unhappy in its own way.
The happy transitions across much of Central Europe following the end of the Cold War were made easier by the fact that the old communist order more or less died on its feet and surrendered power peacefully.
This, along with generous support from Western Europe, the United States, and others, helped to create a mood conducive to reconciliation, allowing each country to tackle in a measured, non-vengeful way the many difficult moral issues arising from the recent dark past.
Above all, perhaps, these transitions took place amidst a wider network of legitimate institutions – the European Union, OSCE, NATO, and the Council of Europe – championing the rule of law.
This supportive context provided a roadmap for national policymakers, helping them to build democratic institutions and marginalize extremists.
Discredited regimes may cling all the more ruthlessly and ruinously to power, as in Syria.
Or they may create all sorts of new problems on their way out of power, as in Libya.
Or they may be struggling to introduce democratic accountability while maintaining stability, as in Egypt.
In Burma, we see another model – a bold attempt after decades of military rule to move in a controlled but purposeful way toward a new, inclusive form of government.
A military elite favors step-by-step reform, but wants to protect its position and is determined to avoid a descent into chaos.
And the ruling elite opens a number of parliamentary seats to a popular vote, only to be shocked by a landslide opposition win.
Moreover, as was true in Poland, Burma’s opposition leaders must strike a delicate balance: satisfy their impatient supporters (many of whom have suffered mightily under the old regime), while offering those still in power the prospect of a worthwhile future.
Burma has a very different internal political dynamic, not least because of the complex relationships among its various ethnic and linguistic communities – social cleavages that were not an issue in largely homogeneous Poland’s transition.
Moreover, unlike Poland when communism collapsed, Burma already has powerful business tycoons flourishing under the existing system – and they mean to maintain and develop their privileges.
Above all, there is no immediate international institutional context encouraging steady change and establishing standards and benchmarks: Burma must find its own path.
Earlier this month, I visited Burma, where I met President Thein Sein and the opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi, as well as former political prisoners and many other activists.
I came away convinced that Burma is a country on the move – and moving firmly in a good direction.
All sides accept that this large and resource-rich country has under-performed for far too long.
They also agree that a step-by-step approach, based on reconciliation, is better than an open struggle for power, which could quickly take on a calamitous ethnic dimension.
That consensus will remain credible as long as political reform continues and economic growth accelerates.
After such a long period of stagnation, people demand to see and feel changes for the better in their own lives.
The rest of us should be constructive and creative, not prescriptive and pernickety.
The EU’s suspension of sanctions and general readiness to engage constructively make sense.
Burma’s leadership should respond by releasing all remaining political prisoners and opening up the entire political process.
The EU also should ensure that its development assistance – and the process of delivering it – enhances pluralism and reconciliation by benefiting all of Burma’s communities fairly and transparently.
Poland is making its own direct contribution, above all by helping senior Burmese decision makers, opposition leaders, and business representatives to understand the “technology of transition” – that is, the sequencing of technical reforms, which has helped to make Poland one of Europe’s healthiest economies today.
Perhaps the most encouraging aspect of my visit to Burma was a willingness to open up and learn from other countries that have navigated the painful transition from dictatorship to democracy.
One general asked me, off the record, “How did you manage to implement such dramatic political changes without bloodshed?”
A young woman at our democracy workshop told the assembled journalists and lecturers, “We thought that Burma was a one-off example.
Given that spirit – and appropriate foreign assistance – I am confident that it will all work out for Burma, too.
"I feel like myself again on Paxil," says the woman in advertisements for that antidepressant; so, supposedly, do users of Prozac, Ritalin, Botox, Propecia, Xenical, anabolic steroids, cosmetic surgery, hormone replacement therapy, and sex-reassignment surgery.
Even as people undergo dramatic self-transformations, altering their personalities with psychoactive drugs and their bodies with surgery, they describe the transformation as a matter of becoming "who they really are."
"It was only by using steroids," writes the bodybuilder Samuel Fussell, "that I looked on the outside the way I felt on the inside."
With sex-reassignment surgery, writes Jan Morris, "I achieved Identity at last."
If Nietzsche were alive today, he might be pitching antidepressants for Pfizer.
Many people nowadays do not expect to find the meaning of their lives by looking to God, Truth, or any other external moral framework.
Being in touch with one's inner feelings, desires, and aspirations is now seen as a necessary part of living a fully human life.
The language of authenticity has come to feel like a natural way to describe our aspirations, our psychopathologies, even our self-transformations.
What is new is the involvement of doctors in fulfilling this desire for self-transformation.
In recent decades, doctors have become much more comfortable giving physical treatments to remedy psychological and social problems.
Today doctors give synthetic growth hormone to short boys, or Propecia to middle-aged men to remedy the shame of baldness.
Now that enhancement of psychological well-being is regarded by some as a proper medical goal, the range of potentially treatable conditions has expanded enormously.
For every person using an antidepressant to become "better than well," another is using it for a life-threatening sense of hopelessness.
If sex reassignment surgery can relieve a person's suffering, then the question of whether or not it is treating a conventionally defined illness seems beside the point.
Yet remaining untroubled by all this medically induced self-transformation is hard.
One worry is about what the philosopher Margaret Olivia Little calls "cultural complicity."
As difficult as we may find it to condemn individuals who use drugs and surgery to transform themselves in accordance with dominant aesthetic standards, on a social level these procedures compound the problems they are meant to fix.
The more Asians get plastic surgery to make their eyes look European, for example, the more entrenched will become the social norm that says Asian eyes are something to be ashamed of.
The same goes for light skin, large breasts, Gentile noses, or a sparkling personality.
For several years now, antidepressants have been the most profitable class of drugs in the US.
They are also widely used to treat social anxiety disorder, post-traumatic stress disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, obsessive-compulsive disorder, eating disorders, sexual compulsions, and premenstrual dysphoric disorder.
Many of these disorders were once thought to be rare, even non-existent.
But once a pharmaceutical company develops a treatment for a psychiatric disorder, it acquires a financial interest in making sure that doctors diagnose the disorder as often as possible.
This may transform what was once seen as an ordinary human variation - being shy, uptight, or melancholy - into a psychiatric problem.
The more people who are persuaded that they have a disorder that can be medicated, the more medication the company can sell.
Perhaps the hardest worry to pin down is what Harvard political theorist Michael Sandel calls "the drive to mastery."
Sandel is worried less about the possible consequences of enhancement technologies than about the sensibility they reflect - a sensibility that sees the world as something to be manipulated and controlled.
As Sandel points out, perhaps we could design a world in which we all have access to mood-brightening drugs and cosmetic surgery; in which athletes have access to safe, performance-enhancing drugs; in which we could safely choose and manipulate the genetic traits of our children; and in which we eat factory-farmed pigs and chickens that are genetically engineered not to feel pain.
Many of us would resist such a world -- not because such a world would be unjust, or because it would lead to more pain and suffering, but because of the extent to which it has been planned and engineered.
We would resist the idea that the world exists merely to be manipulated for human ends.
LONDON – One of the most dispiriting features of today’s international debates is that the threat to humanity posed by the world’s 23,000 nuclear weapons – and by those who would build more of them, or be only too willing to use them – has been consigned to the margin of politics.
US President Barack Obama did capture global attention with his Prague speech in 2009, which made a compelling case for a nuclear weapon-free world.
And he did deliver on a major new arms-reduction treaty with Russia, and hosted a summit aimed at reducing the vulnerability of nuclear weapons and materials to theft or diversion.
It would take a brave gambler to bet on ratification of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty by the US Senate any time soon.
The film An Inconvenient Truth won an Academy Award, led to a Nobel Prize for Al Gore, and attracted huge international attention to the disastrous impact of climate change.
But Countdown to Zero, an equally compelling documentary, made by the same production team and making shockingly clear how close and how often the world has come to nuclear catastrophe, has come and gone almost without trace.
Japan’s Fukushima disaster has generated a massive debate about the safety of nuclear power, but not about nuclear weapons.
Fear of a nuclear holocaust seems to have ended with the Cold War.
Indeed, Hiroshima and Nagasaki seem an eternity ago; new nuclear-weapons states have emerged without the world ending; no terrorist nuclear device has threatened a major city; and possession of nuclear weapons, for the states that have them, seems to be a source of comfort and pride rather than concern or embarrassment.
With only a handful of exceptions, the current generation of political leaders shows little interest in disarmament, and not much more in non-proliferation.
Few have worked harder to shake the world out of its complacency than four of the hardest-nosed realists ever to hold public office: former US Secretaries of State Henry Kissinger and George Shultz, former US Secretary of Defense William Perry, and former US Senator Sam Nunn.
In a series of opinion articles over the last five years, they have repeatedly sounded the alarm that the risks of nuclear weapons outweigh any possible usefulness in today’s security environment.
Moreover, they have called for a complete rethinking of deterrence strategy, in order to minimize, and ultimately eliminate, reliance on the most indiscriminately destructive weapons ever invented.
Last week in London, the “gang of four” convened a private meeting with leading think-tank researchers and a worldwide cast of some 30 former foreign and defense ministers, generals, and ambassadors who share their concern and commitment.
But our average age was over 65, and the limits of our effectiveness were neatly described by former British Defence Minister Des Browne: “People who used to be something really want to tackle this issue.
Getting the kind of messages that emerged from the London meeting embedded in public and political consciousness is going to be slow boring through hard boards.
The first message is that the threat of a nuclear weapons catastrophe remains alarmingly real.
Existing global stockpiles have a destructive capacity equal to 150,000 Hiroshima bombs, and in handling them there is an omnipresent potential for human error, system error, or misjudgment under stress.
Pakistan versus India is a devastating conflict-in-waiting, and North Korea and Iran remain volatile sources of concern.
We know that terrorist groups have the capacity to engineer nuclear devices and would explode them anywhere they could; we simply cannot be confident that we can forever deny them access to the fissile material they need to fuel them.
The second message is that Cold War nuclear-deterrence doctrine is irrelevant to today’s world.
So long as nuclear weapons remain, states can justify maintaining a minimum nuclear-deterrent capability.
But that can be done without weapons on high alert, and with drastically reduced arsenals in the case of the US and Russia, and, at worst, at current levels for the other nuclear-armed states.
The third message is that if the existing nuclear powers sincerely want to prevent others from joining their club, they cannot keep justifying the possession of nuclear weapons as a means of protection for themselves or their allies against other weapons of mass destruction, especially biological weapons, or conventional weapons.
Indeed, the single most difficult issue inhibiting serious movement toward disarmament – certainly in the case of Pakistan versus India, and Russia and China versus the US – are conventional arms imbalances, and ways of addressing them must rise to the top of the policy agenda.
The final message is that neither piecemeal change nor sloganeering will do the job.
Nuclear disarmament, non-proliferation, counter-terrorism, and civil nuclear-energy risk reduction are inextricably connected, and they call for sustained commitment around a comprehensive agenda, and detailed argument.
But he’s always worth listening to, and never more so than with respect to the question that he has been asking for years: When the next nuclear-weapons catastrophe happens, as it surely will, the world will have to respond dramatically.
PRINCETON – On February 1, the United Nations Security Council met to consider the Arab League’s proposal to end the violence in Syria.
Midway through her remarks, she began speaking not to the Syrian ambassador, who was in the room, or even the Syrian government, but directly to the Syrian people.
She said that change in Syria would require Syrians of every faith and ethnicity to work together, protecting and respecting the rights of minorities.
Addressing those minorities, she continued: “We do hear your fears, and we do honor your aspirations.
She told Syria’s business, military, and other leaders that they must recognize that their futures lie with the state, not with the regime.
“Syria belongs to its 23 million citizens, not to one man or his family.”
Speaking directly to citizens – seeing a country’s people, as well as its government – is not just a rhetorical device.
While many foreign-policy pundits have focused on the US “pivot to Asia,” Clinton has also executed a less-publicized, but no less important, pivot to the people.
She has introduced policies, programs, and institutional reforms designed to support government-to-society and society-to-society diplomacy, alongside traditional government-to-government relations.
These initiatives do not get headlines, but they will gradually transform much of American foreign policy.
In January, the State Department unveiled a new “super-office” of Civilian Security, Democracy, and Human Rights, under the leadership of Under-Secretary Maria Otero.
The office brings together agencies that focus on international law enforcement, counter-terrorism, and reconstruction and stabilization with those charged with advancing democracy, human rights, and humanitarian assistance to refugees and migrants.
Otero explains the logic behind the initiative in terms of “protecting individuals.”
That, in turn, requires “not just engaging state to state,” but also working “with players and actors outside of the traditional [channels] we’ve engaged in.”
Viewed from this perspective, countering terrorism includes rebutting terrorist propaganda with a strategic communications campaign.
Countering narco-gang violence includes working with Mexican telecommunications mogul Carlos Slim to develop tools that allow ordinary citizens to report violence anonymously by text message and enable police to map the results.
Strengthening democracy means working with the Kenyan developers of a crisis-mapping platform that allows anyone with a cell phone to text information about election fraud or violence to a central monitoring station.
On a country-by-country basis, pivoting to the people means engaging with Egypt’s bloggers as well as with the ruling Supreme Council of the Armed Forces; convening young entrepreneurs in Tunisia, Algeria, and Morocco and connecting them to funding and mentoring; and using social media in Russia to rebut government efforts to smear the US ambassador.
And, working at an official level, it means co-sponsoring with Brazil the Open Government Partnership, which brings together governments committed to increasing transparency, accountability, and citizen participation, and uses mutual peer pressure and open reporting to hold them to their commitments.
Clinton has created a raft of new positions at the State Department to spur outreach to different social segments.
The strategies and programs developed by the Ambassador for Global Women’s Issues, the Special Adviser for Global Youth Issues, the Senior Adviser for Civil Society and Emerging Democracies, the Special Representative for Outreach to Muslim Communities, the Special Representative for Global Partnerships, and the Special Representative for Commercial and Business Affairs often present a very different face of the US.
For example, Ambassador Melanne Verveer has attended more than 1,000 events around the world focused on empowering women in areas ranging from peace negotiations to farming.
Similarly, she has launched programs such as mWomen, designed to expand and support mobile technology that increases women’s independence, security, and access to health care and vital knowledge.
The Office of Global Youth Affairs is building a local youth council at every US embassy around the world, to advise and help to implement embassy programming aimed at local youth.
Much of the programming aimed at youth, women, entrepreneurs, diasporas, technologists, and other social groups is partly funded and conducted by the private sector.
Indeed, the Obama administration’s National Security Strategy mentions “public-private partnerships” more than 30 times.
Clinton created the Global Partnership Initiative to build as many coalitions, networks, and partnerships as possible with corporations, foundations, NGOs, universities, and other civic organizations.
Here, the pivot to the people includes the American people: the dynamism, creativity, and resources of American business and non-profit organizations already engaged around the world.
One privately-funded initiative spearheaded by the State Department will send 300 dogwood trees to Japan this spring, to be planted in the tsunami-affected region and in Tokyo to express the American people’s support for the Japanese people; another will send English teachers throughout Southeast Asia.
After participating in the Friends of Syria conference in Tunis, Clinton convened a town hall meeting with Tunisian youth.
In her opening remarks, she told her audience that “young people are at the heart of today’s great strategic opportunities and challenges.”
Speaking about her lifetime efforts to put “women’s empowerment on the international agenda,” she added, “It’s time to put youth empowerment there as well.”
The implications of all of this activity, which Clinton calls “twenty-first-century statecraft,” are profound.
From now on, US diplomatic relations with other countries will engage directly with their people and connect them to the American people as much as possible.
From the perspective of US diplomats, the people of every country stand on the same footing as their government.
BERKELEY – It may be hard to imagine that Europe’s crisis could worsen, but it just has.
European Union leaders failed at their summit two weeks ago to produce anything of substance.
China and Brazil are clearly reluctant to come to the rescue by providing a large injection of foreign cash.
And the recent G-20 summit in Cannes produced no agreement on steps that might have helped to resolve the crisis.
The trigger may have been outgoing Prime Minister George Papandreou’s ill-advised decision to call for a referendum on the EU’s rescue package (which implies further severe austerity measures); but the fundamental problem is that a brutal recession made the government’s demise all but inevitable.
The formation of a new national unity government does not mean that the Greek problem is behind Europe or the world.
On the contrary, the new government’s position will be no more tenable than that of its predecessor.
Until there is hope, however remote, that Greece can begin to grow again, the problem will not go away.
Even worse for financial stability, Papandreou’s announcement of a referendum provoked German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy to break an important taboo.
Previously, European leaders had averred that the euro was forever, repeating at every turn that they would do whatever it took to hold the monetary union together.
Last week, in a dangerous departure, Merkel and Sarkozy bluntly told the Greeks that it was up to them to decide whether they wanted to keep the euro.
Their statements were designed to beat Greek politicians into submission, and may have succeeded, at least for now.
The temptation to bet against continued Greek participation in the euro is now greater than ever.
As investors place their bets, the balance sheets of Greek banks and the Greek government will deteriorate further, which could cause bearish expectations to become self-fulfilling.
The greater danger is that where Greece leads, Portugal and Italy will be forced to follow.
Anyone who doubts this need only think back to 1992, when the European Monetary System fell apart.
In September of that year, Bundesbank President Helmut Schlesinger made some reckless comments about how devaluations within Europe’s system of supposed stable exchange rates “cannot be ruled out.”
Schlesinger’s unguarded remarks signaled that the Bundesbank was not willing to do whatever it took to preserve the system – a signal that encouraged investors to place massive bets against the British pound and Italian lira.
If Merkel and Sarkozy are serious about preserving the euro, they will have to repair the damage caused by their reckless remarks.
They should acknowledge that the only entity with the capacity to stabilize the situation is the European Central Bank.
And they must give the ECB the political cover that it needs to do what is required to preserve the system.
Its decision to cut rates by 25 basis points at the first policy meeting under its new president, Mario Draghi, is the one ray of light in an otherwise darkening sky.
Still, given German sensitivities, Merkel should use her bully pulpit to reassure her public.
More controversially, the ECB needs to increase its purchases of Italian bonds.
Unless yields on those bonds fall to German levels, there is no way that Italy’s debt arithmetic can be made to add up.
But Draghi has indicated that he is reluctant to see the ECB become a lender to governments.
Reassuring the markets by adopting structural reforms, he has observed, is properly the responsibility of those governments, not of the central bank.
Merkel and Sarkozy need to make the case that if the euro is to become a normal currency, Europe needs a normal central bank – one that does not merely target inflation like an automaton, but that also understands its responsibilities as a lender of last resort.
Meanwhile, Italy, now under the watchful eye of the International Monetary Fund, needs to move ahead with those pro-growth reforms in order to reassure the ECB’s shareholders that the central bank’s bond purchases are not money losers.
If it does, maybe – just maybe – there will be reason to hope that the European project’s darkest hour is just before the dawn.
NEW YORK – Ten years ago this week, Russian tanks halted a few hours’ march short of Tbilisi, the capital of Georgia.
That short war in the Caucasus brought down the curtain on nearly two decades of post-Cold War Western hegemony in Europe.
Encouraged by US President George W. Bush’s administration, Georgia had initiated NATO membership talks, impelling Russian President Vladimir Putin to defend the red line he had drawn the previous year.
Russia, Putin announced at the Munich Security Conference in February 2007, would regard any further eastward expansion of Western institutions as an act of aggression.
Within weeks, however, the onset of the global financial crisis captured the world’s attention.
In Washington, London, Paris, Berlin, and Moscow, preventing bank failures, not military escalation, was the most pressing problem.
At first glance, the Georgian war and the global financial crisis seem unrelated.
The absorption of post-communist Europe into the West was not simply a matter of velvet revolutions.
What Bush’s defense secretary, Donald Rumsfeld, called “new Europe” – the post-communist NATO allies and European Union members – depended on hundreds of billions of dollars in investment.
The loans came from the same European banks that helped fuel the US real-estate boom and inflate the even bigger housing bubbles in the United Kingdom, Ireland, and Spain.
The most extreme real-estate inflation in the world between 2005 and 2007 was on NATO’s Eastern frontier in the Baltics.
Along with a security guarantee against Russia, the post-communist countries craved prosperity.
By the early 2000s, former Soviet republics like Georgia and Ukraine, which had not gained admission to either NATO or the EU, feared being left behind.
Their desire to “catch up” prompted the so-called color revolutions of 2003 and 2004, reflecting their belief that economic growth, democratization, and a pro-Western orientation went hand in hand.
But it was not only the Soviet Union’s former satellites that benefited from the debt-fueled global boom.
The authority and power of Putin’s regime, too, was (largely) a function of globalization – specifically, the huge surge in oil prices.
In 2008, it seemed that Russia’s state-controlled energy giant Gazprom, benefiting from unprecedented growth in emerging-markets demand, led by China, might soon become the world’s largest corporation.
In 2008, two pressure fronts of global capitalism were rushing toward each other across Eurasia.
While Western investment drove economic growth in Central and Eastern Europe, the commodity boom sustained Russia’s geopolitical revival.
According to the mantra of globalization, at least, trade benefits all sides.
The goal is peace, stability, and the rule of law, not geopolitical advantage, its senior representatives guilelessly maintain.
Whether or not they truly believe it, the EU’s new post-communist members saw it differently.
For them, NATO and EU membership were part of an anti-Russian package, just as they had been for West European countries in the 1950s.
In response to the agreement in 2005 to construct the Nord Stream gas pipeline, Poland’s then-foreign minister, Radek Sikorski, denounced it as a new version of the 1939 Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact.
Although Ukraine, too, applied for NATO membership in 2008, it did not provoke Russian intervention.
But the war in Georgia split the Ukrainian political class three ways, between those who favored alignment with the West, those who favored Russia, and those who preferred a policy of balance.
No part of the world economy was hit harder by that crisis than the former Soviet sphere.
When global lending imploded, the most fragile borrowers were cut off first.
Followed closely by a collapse in commodity prices, it dealt a devastating shock to the “transition economies.”
As one of the world’s largest oil and gas exporters, Russia was one of the worst affected.
But after the humiliation of the financial crises of the late 1990s, Putin had seen to it that Russia was armed with substantial dollar reserves – the third largest after China and Japan.
Reserves of $600 billion enabled Russia to ride out the storm of 2008 without external help.
Some found themselves turning to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for help.
The political leadership of the Baltic states toughed it out, accepting savage austerity to continue on their path toward euro membership.
In Hungary, the governing parties were discredited, opening the door to Prime Minister Viktor Orbán’s illiberal regime.
But no country in the region was strategically more important, more fragile politically, or worse hit economically than Ukraine.
In a matter of weeks, Ukraine was dealt a devastating one-two punch by the war in Georgia and the financial crisis.
This opened the door to the successful presidential candidacy of pro-Russian Viktor Yanukovych in 2010, and set in train desperate financial negotiations with the IMF, the EU, and Russia, culminating in the crisis of 2013.
Given current talk of trade wars, it bears recalling that it was an argument over Ukraine’s association agreement with the EU that led to Yanukovych’s overthrow and an undeclared war with Russia.
Back in 1989, the end of the Cold War seemed to suggest that market-driven economic growth was an irrepressible force that gave the edge to the US-led West.
It was a small step from there to assuming that extending capitalism to the post-Soviet world would continue to shift the balance of power in the West’s direction.
The events of August and September 2008 taught two painful and deeply disconcerting lessons.
Truly comprehensive global growth breeds multipolarity, which, in the absence of an overarching diplomatic and geopolitical settlement, is a recipe for conflict.
Ten years later, the West is still struggling to come to terms with these disconcerting realizations.
Today all eyes are on Asia, the rise of China, and its growing influence across Eurasia, Africa, and Latin America.
So we should not forget the Georgian crisis of August 2008, when it first became obvious how dangerous the new global economic dispensation might become.
At around $30 a barrel, oil prices are remaining high even though a soft global economy means that world demand is low.
The previously fashionable view that the American seizure of Iraqi oil resources would break OPEC and send the price of oil plummeting has turned out to be nonsense.
Even with improved security, it will take five years to get Iraq oil fully on stream.
With the American economy now recovering strongly, the price of oil should stay high, or even rise further, in the foreseeable future.
So the announcement by Russian Finance Minister Alexei Kudrin that Russia will start an oil stabilization fund comes at a good moment.
It means that the fund can look forward to several years of surpluses.
An oil fund should be seen as an instrument of macroeconomic stabilization, segregated from normal revenue streams.
Today most of the world's finance ministers are committed to balancing the budget over the business cycle.
If output grows above trend, the budget is in surplus; if it grows below trend, the budget is in deficit.
If the finance minister gets his sums right, the national debt remains the same over the cycle, with no tendency to grow or contract.
A constant debt-GDP ratio is thus a key indicator of fiscal sustainability.
In a country like Russia, half of whose budget revenues are derived from taxes on oil, setting up an oil fund is the equivalent of a commitment to balance the budget over the cycle.
This strategy is dictated by the fact that oil prices are more volatile--and therefore more destabilizing for the budget--than fluctuations in GDP.
Government taxes and spending are set to balance at the average oil price over a period of years.
(Over the last five years, the average would have been $22 a barrel.)
The oil fund accumulates surpluses and incurs deficits when the price of oil is above or below the average.
Surpluses are used to pay off debt, and the deficits are financed by acquiring debt, leaving the debt-GDP ratio constant over the cycle.
A fund that works like this sends a strong signal that the government is committed to sound long-term finance.
The key to success is to realize that an oil fund is a limited instrument for a specific purpose.
The danger is that officials will be tempted to use it to solve other problems, which will destroy its usefulness as a stabilising mechanism.
The first danger is that politicians will spend the surpluses on vote-winning social programmes.
The best way to guard against this is to open a special account with an independent central bank, where the fund can be kept safely out of the reach of politicians.
A more subtle danger is that the fund will be seen as a direct means to combat the so-called "Dutch disease."
This is a situation where earnings from oil exports drive up the value of the currency, reducing the competitiveness of other domestically produced products.
Investing fund surpluses in foreign securities would counteract the tendency for the exchange rate to rise.
This is true, but the same result can be achieved by paying off foreign debt, which is a better policy, especially at the outset, when the fund is trying to build up credibility.
Properly used, an oil fund can contribute to this aim, but it should do so indirectly, by promoting domestic financial stability.
This will enable low real interest rates, which (together with bank reform) is the main condition for the growth of small and medium-sized enterprises needed to diversify the economic structure and ensure a more stable pattern of growth.
The election of the militant and hitherto extra-parliamentary group Hamas in the Palestinian territories reminds us of what democracy cannot achieve.
No one in a more established democratic state is surprised if one’s own side does not win.
Democracy is about competing parties, and, unless they form a “grand coalition,” they cannot all win.
But what if an election’s winners have no intention of abiding by the rules that are part and parcel of the democratic process?
One remembers Hitler, who, while his own party did not quite get 50% of the vote, could base his “seizure of power” on a parliamentary majority.
More recently, elections in the post-communist countries of Europe have brought groups to power whose democratic credentials are dubious, to say the least.
Nevertheless, one must wonder about a winning movement with quite a few elected members in Israeli prisons and others who are not likely to get permission to enter the country in which they were elected, so that the new parliament cannot function properly.
To be effective, elections must be preceded by an extensive period of debate and argument.
First elections, in particular, are almost inevitably of limited value as foundations of democracy, because they take place in an emotionally charged atmosphere and largely without substantive debate.
They are an invitation to assert who one is and where one belongs rather than to a competition of well-defined and comprehensive political programs.
This means, secondly, that first elections, and perhaps elections more generally, are not themselves a sufficient guarantee of liberty.
As the German constitutional court judge Ernst-Wolfgang Böckenförde famously put it, democracies cannot create the conditions of their survival and success.
There must be certain accepted rules of the political game that are binding on all, so that whoever does not accept or obey them is disqualified.
There is an obvious logic to establishing a constitutional convention first and then holding elections under the rules agreed by it.
But the constitutional convention, too, must be elected, and this election may run into the very difficulties that plague first elections to parliaments in new democracies.
Once the rules of the game are set, there still remains the question: who enforces them?
Who could say to Hamas that unless they accept certain rules, their election is not valid?
This requires a constitutional court of sorts, as well as a judiciary and institutions to enforce its rulings.
In sovereign states and territories, this is highly unlikely to come about on its own.
It is no accident that the democratic process has emerged most smoothly where there was some external power to back up the constitution.
Democracy in the sense of free elections within certain rules does not allow the rest of us to say that the cause of freedom has prevailed and that we can walk away.
Some say that it is achieved only once a country has passed the “two-turnover test,” that is, two changes of government without violence.
One must add to this criterion a culture of debate that makes elections a genuine contest of a plurality of answers to the issues at stake.
For the Palestinian territories, this means that people’s expectations of the elections were probably too high.
By the same token, reducing expectations means that the significance of the results should not be exaggerated.
The result may yet turn out to be a stepping-stone towards an effective state that deserves international recognition.
In the meantime, the key task is to promote the rule of law, backed by the international community.
PARIS – In each of the 27 states of the European Union, the campaign for the just concluded elections for the European Parliament occurred in an atmosphere of indifference, with voters, candidates, and the media focusing mostly on domestic issues.
Perhaps for precisely this reason, the abstention rate (an average of 57%), was the highest since the first vote in 1979, while the composition of the Parliament, with its right-wing majority, underwent no significant changes.
Following the 2004 elections, the European People’s Party (EPP), which regroups right and center right parties, held 288 MPs of the Parliament’s 785 seats.
In 2009, it is still the first force in the new parliament, with 267 deputies out of a total of 736: the decrease in its membership is also due to the stated commitment of the British Conservatives and the Czech right party to defect from the EPP to create their own party, with a stronger right-wing line.
That opens the way to the possible return for a second term of José Manuel Barroso as president of the Commission.
This situation is paradoxical, as Europe is experiencing one of the worst economic crises in its history, with falling employment and living standards and rising worries about the future.
One should have expected the right-wing to be punished in countries where they govern.
The latest returns, indeed, show quite the opposite – in France, Italy, Poland, Denmark, and even Germany, where the CDU had won a large number of representatives in the 2004 elections.
Where the right is in opposition, such as in Spain and Portugal, it has improved its position.
On the other hand, the Socialist Party lost support almost everywhere, especially in countries – Spain, Portugal, Hungary, and the Netherlands – where it is in power.
The European socialist party (ESP), which held 215 deputies in the old parliament, secured only 160 seats.
In France and Denmark, where the Socialist Party is in opposition, it did no better.
In France, the Socialist Party is almost outnumbered by Europe Ecologie, a green coalition gathered by the charismatic Daniel Cohn-Bendit.
The liberals remain the third force of the European parliament, with around 80 deputies, less than its previous 100 members.
The Greens appear to be the main beneficiaries of the elections and become the forth force: they will get around 55 seats, a gain of more than 10 seats.
Extreme parties also benefited from the elections, as well as some “eurosceptic” parties.
In France, Jean-Marie Le Pen’s party has been substantially weakened, but in the Netherlands, the anti–Islam party led by Geert Wilders won 17% of the votes, and in Austria, Denmark, Hungary, Slovakia, and even in the UK the far right did better than expected.
But those worried about the rise of extremism in Europe should take some heart from the fact that there are many differences of views between these parties.
The predominance of the right in the future European Parliament calls for some explanation.
The main reason might be the poor fortunes of social-democratic parties, which now head only eight governments in the EU, despite their efforts since 2000 to minimize their waning influence within their traditional electorate – blue-collar workers and white-collar public-sector employees, middle managers, and civil servants.
This is true for Northern Europe’s large social-democratic parties (Denmark and Sweden) but also for parties that attempted to “modernize” themselves by combining socialism and liberalism (the UK and Spain), and even for Europe’s more traditional socialist parties (Belgium and France), which, despite local successes, have found it difficult to re-gain national power.
Meanwhile, those parties that intend to move left, such as die Linke in Germany, risk being overwhelmed by the radical anti-capitalist left.
It all seems as if, in the face of a crisis that calls into question decades of finance– driven capitalism and the dominance of free-market ideology, and despite widespread expectations of a revival of the welfare state, the social-democratic ideal has failed to convince a majority of Europeans that it can provide effective solutions.
When it comes to managing a deep and complex crisis, indeed, European voters tend to prefer the experience of conservative politicians.
This is all the more remarkable at a time when right-wing governments embrace regulation and even state intervention – the cornerstones of leftist ideologies.
At the same time, a request for transparency and a care for ecology are growing in the youngest generations across Europe, which explains the progress of the Green vote in many countries.
In short, the global economic crisis has destabilized the ideological divides that have long defined the European political scene and has created new dividing lines.
These new chasms might be the most important long term outcome of the European Parliament elections.
NEW DELHI – Indians haven’t often had much to root for at the Oscars, Hollywood’s annual celebration of cinematic success.
Only two Indian movies have been nominated in the Best Foreign Language Film category in the last 50 years, and neither won.
So Indians take vicarious pleasure in the triumphs of “mainstream” pictures with an Indian connection – the seven Oscars won by Richard Attenborough’s Gandhi in 1983, for instance, or the success of The Sixth Sense, written and directed by a Philadelphian of Indian descent, Manoj Night Shyamalan.
This year, the country’s attention has been riveted by the surprise Oscar winning best picture, Slumdog Millionaire – set in India, with Indian characters, Indian actors and Indian themes – which was nominated in ten categories.
Indeed, for the first time, Indian citizens won for best song and for A. R. Rahman’s musical score.
Movies made by Westerners about India have rarely been worth writing home about, ranging as they’ve done from the ignorant racism of Steven Spielberg’s Indiana Jones and the Temple of Doom to David Lean’s well-intentioned but cringe-inducing Passage to India , with Alec Guinness warbling away in brown-face.
Directed by Scotland’s Danny Boyle ( Trainspotting ), and based on the page-turning novel Q and A by Indian diplomat Vikas Swarup, the film has captured the hearts of audiences and critics around the world with its tale of a child from the slums, a tea-boy in a call-center, who wins a TV quiz show modeled on Who Wants to be a Millionaire .
Exuberant, exciting, gaudy, and gritty in a way that can only be called Dickensian, Slumdog Millionaire brings contemporary Mumbai to life from the seamy side up, and it does so with brio, compassion, and all-round cinematic excellence.
This being India, the film – which is just beginning its cinematic release in the country, months after it hit Western screens – has also provoked dissent.
Protests have been mounted by slum-dwellers against the movie’s title: the term “slumdog,” coined by the screenwriter, has given great offense, with demonstrators holding up postcards declaiming, “We are not dogs.”
(To the dismay of Indian liberals, a judge has admitted a petition against the filmmakers, but it is difficult to believe the case will go far.)
Others have, more predictably, decried the film’s searingly authentic depiction of India’s poverty and slum life.
Slumdog Millionaire was filmed in large part with small hand-held digital cameras on location in Dharavi, Mumbai’s (and Asia’s) biggest slum, and does not skip the mounds of garbage, cesspits, and overflowing drains.
There is even a scene involving human excrement that is both revolting and hilarious.
Slum life is depicted with integrity and dignity, and with a joie de vivre that transcends its setting.
It is easy to see why this movie would appeal to international filmgoers in a way that a bleaker film like City of Joy , which was set in the slums of Calcutta, could not.
Others have protested that the film shows Indians as conniving, unprincipled, and ruthless, and that the only compassionate people in the film are a pair of white tourists who give the protagonist some money.
This may reveal something of Boyle’s view of human nature, but most Indian viewers know they live in a land largely devoid of larger-than-life heroes.
We Indians have learned to take human beings as they are, which is to say, as grossly imperfect.
And the film’s hero, played by the teenage British-Indian actor Dev Patel with a look that combines intensity and expressiveness, and yet seems utterly genuine, is as sincere a protagonist as you could hope to find.
So, Slumdog Millionaire following its four Golden Globes and Screen Actors’ Guild awards, seven BAFTA awards (the British Oscars), and eight Academy Awards, is a cause to celebrate in India.
And, if some of the film’s larger-than-expected profits are directed toward the slums where the movie was made, the protestors are quite likely to fade away.
Slumdog Millionaire is the work of an artist at the peak of his powers.
India is Boyle’s palette, and Mumbai – that teeming “maximum city,” with 19 million strivers on the make, jostling, scheming, struggling, and killing for success – is his brush.
The portrait that emerges has been executed with bold strokes, vivid colors, and striking images.
It would have stayed in the mind’s eye a long time, whether or not it swept the Oscars.
A full-scale financial crisis is triggered by a sharp fall in the prices of a large set of assets that banks and other financial institutions own, or that make up their borrowers’ financial reserves.
The first – and “easiest” – mode is when investors refuse to buy at normal prices not because they know that economic fundamentals are suspect, but because they fear that others will panic, forcing everybody to sell at fire-sale prices.
The cure for this mode – a liquidity crisis caused by declining confidence in the financial system – is to ensure that banks and other financial institutions with cash liabilities can raise what they need by borrowing from others or from central banks.
This is the rule set out by Walter Bagehot more than a century ago: calming the markets requires central banks to lend at a penalty rate to every distressed institution that would be able to put up reasonable collateral in normal times.
Once everybody is sure that, no matter how much others panic, financial institutions won’t have to dump illiquid assets at a loss, the panic will subside.
And the penalty rate means that financial institutions can’t profit from the investment behavior that left them illiquid – and creates an incentive to take due care to guard against such contingencies in the future.
In the second mode, asset prices fall because investors recognize that they should never have been as high as they were, or that future productivity growth is likely to be lower and interest rates higher.
This kind of crisis cannot be solved simply by ensuring that solvent borrowers can borrow, because the problem is that banks aren’t solvent at prevailing interest rates.
Banks are highly leveraged institutions with relatively small capital bases, so even a relatively small decline in the prices of assets that they or their borrowers hold can leave them unable to pay off depositors, no matter how long the liquidation process.
The problem is not illiquidity but insolvency at prevailing interest rates.
But if the central bank reduces interest rates and credibly commits to keeping them low in the future, asset prices will rise.
Thus, low interest rates make the problem go away, while the Bagehot rule – with its high lending rate for banks – would make matters worse.
Of course, easy monetary policy can cause inflation, and the failure to “punish” financial institutions that exercised poor judgment in the past may lead to more of the same in the future.
But, as long as the degree of insolvency is small enough that a relatively minor degree of monetary easing can prevent a major depression and mass unemployment, this is a good option in an imperfect world, this is a good option in an imperfect world.
The third mode is like the second: a bursting bubble or bad news about future productivity or interest rates drives the fall in asset prices.
Easing monetary policy won’t solve this kind of crisis, because even moderately lower interest rates cannot boost asset prices enough to restore the financial system to solvency.
First, they can simply nationalize the broken financial system and have the Treasury sort things out – and re-privatize the functioning and solvent parts as rapidly as possible.
Government is not the best form of organization of a financial system in the long term, and even in the short term it is not very good.
Yes, the financial system is insolvent, but it has nominal liabilities and either it or its borrowers have some real assets.
Print enough money and boost the price level enough, and the insolvency problem goes away without the risks entailed by putting the government in the investment and commercial banking business.
The inflation may be severe, implying massive unjust redistributions and at least a temporary grave degradation in the price system’s capacity to guide resource allocation.
Since late summer, the United States Federal Reserve has been attempting to manage the slow-moving financial crisis triggered by the collapse of America’s housing bubble.
At the start, the Fed assumed that it was facing a first-mode crisis – a mere liquidity crisis – and that the principal cure would be to ensure the liquidity of fundamentally solvent institutions.
But the Fed has shifted over the past two months toward policies aimed at a second-mode crisis – more significant monetary loosening, despite the risks of higher inflation, extra moral hazard, and unjust redistribution.
As Fed Vice Chair Don Kohn recently put it, “we should not hold the economy hostage to teach a small segment of the population a lesson.”
No policy makers are yet considering the possibility that the financial crisis might turn out to be in the third mode.
WARSAW – The terrorist attack on a Christmas market in Strasbourg, France, on December 11 came after a month in which the “Yellow Vest” protests in Paris and other cities dominated international headlines.
French police have since tracked down and killed the attacker in a shootout, and an old law of politics holds that the French will now rally behind President Emmanuel Macron – at least for the time being.
That is what happened after the attacks on the offices of Charlie Hebdo in 2015, when then-President Francois Hollande’s declining popularity was momentarily reversed.
It also helps to explain how Vladimir Putin, previously an unknown entity, cemented his power in Russia following a series of bombings in 1999.
Of course, in that case, investigative journalists have marshaled ample evidence to suggest that the government orchestrated the attacks to bolster its public support.
Although the Yellow Vests’ protests continue, tempers have cooled, providing a respite to Macron.
As anyone remotely familiar with French history knows, the competing forces of revolution and Bonapartism have long driven political outcomes.
The French were attracted to the young reformer’s European triumphalism, not because they are particularly fond of the European Union (they aren’t), but because it seemed to augur a return of French imperial grandeur.
But it didn’t take long for the specter of revolution to return.
Though the French yearn for national greatness, they abhor economic pauperization in equal measure.
Instead, he launched a series of reforms that stoked the resentment of the masses.
Owing to his elitist self-presentation and personal background, Macron already looked like a representative of the rich.
But he made matters worse by leading his reform efforts with labor-market deregulation and a reduction of the wealth tax.
When he introduced a new tax on diesel fuel in the name of reducing carbon-dioxide emissions, struggling French commuters saw it as a personal affront.
Were we still living in the twentieth century, the fact that an ecological fuel tax prompted people to don yellow vests (which all motorists in France are required to carry in their vehicles) and take to the streets would not be particularly remarkable.
Both symbolically and practically, the widespread backlash against the proposed fuel tax frustrates necessary and urgent efforts to combat global warming.
But no longer can we assume that anyone who opposes green reforms is a climate-change denier, and therefore greedy, an idiot, or both.
Even if everyone accepted the need to reduce greenhouse-gas emissions, that would not resolve the plight of workers who can barely make ends meet.
The Yellow Vests are primarily from the lower middle and working classes, rather than from the very bottom of the social ladder.
Most are neither unemployed nor climate-change deniers, but they vehemently oppose a tax that they believe they cannot afford to pay.
Many belong to the growing cohort of “working poor” – the “precariat” who have no choice but to accept low-wage positions in which they are often overworked and insecure.
And because they are not unemployed, they and their problems are easily overlooked by French elites.
In France, unemployment itself is high (around 9%), and thus hard to ignore.
But when one adds the growing precariat, one can see that the country has a serious problem on its hands.
Economists estimate that it will cost France €500 ($573) per person per year to meet its emissions-reduction obligations under the 2015 Paris climate accord.
That’s a lot, especially given that disposable household income grew by just 8% between 2007 and 2017, almost none of which accrued to those from which the Yellow Vests draw the bulk of their support.
Moreover, the economic insecurities that gave rise to the Yellow Vests are compounded by social fragmentation and geographic diffusion.
As a result of deindustrialization, people with similar interests are less concentrated in large factory communities; and as a result of globalization, unskilled workers have been priced out of large cities.
Almost by definition, those who live in Paris have nothing to fear, because they are the high-earning beneficiaries of globalization.
But for everyone else, both work and participation in civic life requires commuting over some distance.
That is why the proposed fuel tax hits so close to home, and why the yellow vest has become such a potent and visible symbol.
MOSCOW – Three weeks before Russian President Vladimir Putin’s first election victory, in March 2000, his campaign released a book, First Person: Conversations with Vladimir Putin, based on 24 hours of interviews with three journalists.
With quotes like “Life is such a simple thing, really,” the book revealed a key belief that would underlie Putin’s leadership style: Simplicity can and must be imposed on a complex world.
This worldview, which today pervades the Russian establishment, was not developed by Putin himself; it was introduced by a think tank established in December 1999 and headed by German Gref, who would later become Economic Development and Trade Minister under Putin.
In anticipation of Putin’s victory, Gref’s Center for Strategic Research invited experts to develop two programs – one focused on the economy and the other on public administration reform – based on one fundamental directive: Don’t complicate things.
Fifteen years later, Putin’s ideology, policies, and activities all reflect this obsession with simplification of systems and structures.
The separation of powers in government is too inefficient, so the presidency must dominate all other branches.
The large number of political parties, each with its own platform, is too complicated, so it must be replaced by a short list of a few accepted parties, with one main (and permanent) representation of power.
Freedom of expression facilitates an unproductive cacophony of outrage, so the media must receive clear directives to guide their reporting.
There were also, according to Putin’s regime, too many public institutions performing too many activities with insufficient oversight, so they were made smaller and given specific tasks from a short centralized list of priorities.
Multiple higher courts were too difficult to maintain, so a single court replaced them.
Instead of developing a nuanced solution to a multifaceted problem – an approach that would involve careful thought, not to mention mistakes and adjustments – every issue, from official corruption to business management, was viewed as one-dimensional.
The Putin regime’s aversion to complexity has intensified over time, moving from the relatively innocuous belief that simplicity translates into clarity, manageability, predictability, and safety, to the dangerous conclusion that complexity itself – inherently unpredictable and often impenetrable – is a threat.
Complex or convoluted ideas and institutions, viewed as a product of forceful punditry, deliberately produced by the enemy to baffle and hurt Russia, are to be quashed at all costs.
This black-and-white perspective may seem like a continuation of the Soviet-era worldview.
But, in the 1990s, Russia had made significant progress toward modernization – and not just because it began to adopt Western-style state institutions.
In fact, the main driver of Russia’s modernization was the formation of a new social order based on freedom, diversity, and a recognition that the modern world was rich in opportunities for self-actualization, whether in the arts, business, science, or politics.
But, before a modern open society was fully established or the associated mindset entrenched, it was overtaken by Putin’s “simple is better” approach.
The view that individual opportunity and heterodoxy should be subordinated to overall predictability empowered the political elite to claim omniscience and cite outside interference as the main threat to Russia’s future.
Driven by these beliefs, a union of “liberals” attempted to bring about a kind of bureaucratic modernization, having convinced themselves that liberal political outcomes could somehow be orchestrated by corrupt bureaucracy through limited democratic institutions.
Within just a few years, it became clear not only that, in an inescapably complex world, “simple” solutions do not yield results, but also that restrictions on democracy, together with top-down bureaucratic control, create ideal conditions for personal enrichment.
The destruction of democratic institutions was now being driven both by the desire for simplicity and by pure greed.
The Russian proverb “Simplicity is worse than theft” proved oddly prescient.
While science was not initially deemed a threat, within today’s tightly restricted social and political order, it has emerged as a symbol of autonomy and diversity.
That is why, after being elected for his third (illegal) term as president, Putin asserted full control over the Russian Academy of Sciences.
More recently, the Ministry of Justice added the Dynasty Foundation, established in 2002 by the well-known scientist and telecommunications mogul Dmitry Zimin, to its list of “foreign agents,” most likely with the goal of stifling the organization’s efforts to build a modern scientific community.
(The “foreign funding” that the foundation receives – the reason it was flagged – comes, according to Zimin, from his own bank accounts.)
This repression has had a serious impact on the scientific community, with Russia’s top scientific minds – unwilling to remain in an environment where greed and corruption stifle creativity and exploration – joining investors and capital in fleeing the country.
From 1990 to 2010, around 70% of Russia’s leading mathematicians and half of its theoretical physicists left the country for good.
Biologists, chemists, engineers, and other experts have also been emigrating in search of better opportunities.
These trends will only accelerate as Putin’s regime intensifies its assault on the field.
The oppressive atmosphere of gray, government-imposed simplicity has finally insinuated itself into every sphere of Russian life.
One hopes that when Putin’s reign ends – as it inevitably will, perhaps even soon – Russians will understand that the path toward an open, modern society is never a simple one.
WASHINGTON, DC – Xi Jinping, China’s newly anointed president, made his first visit to the United States in May 1980.
He was a 27-year-old junior officer accompanying Geng Biao, then a vice premier and China’s leading military official.
Geng had been my host the previous January, when I was the first US defense secretary to visit China, acting as an interlocutor for President Jimmy Carter’s administration.
Americans had little reason to notice Xi back then, but his superiors clearly saw his potential.
In the ensuing 32 years, Xi’s stature rose, along with China’s economic and military strength.
His cohort’s ascent to the summit of power marks the retirement of the last generation of leaders designated by Deng Xiaoping (though they retain influence).
Despite China’s greater weight in world affairs, Xi faces internal strains that make China more fragile than is generally understood.
China’s export-led economic model has reached its limits, and the transition to domestic-led growth is intensifying internal frictions.
Managing unrest through repression is more difficult than in the past, as rapid urbanization, economic reform, and social change roils a country of 1.3 billion people.
Ethnic conflicts in outlying regions will also test Xi’s political control.
China’s foreign policy is another cause for concern – especially for the US.
History teaches us that rising powers inevitably compete with status quo leading powers, and that this conflict often leads to war.
For now, the large bilateral trade imbalance has exacerbated US-China tensions, and can be safely reduced only by changes in behavior on both sides – or, unsafely, though a dangerous crisis-driven correction.
More immediately, China’s territorial claims – particularly in the South China Sea, but also regarding its border with India – and its efforts to expand its influence over neighboring countries will force the US to navigate two overarching risks.
The first is confrontation, which could occur directly or as a result of the US being drawn into conflicts between China and its neighbors.
The other risk is that Japan, South Korea, Vietnam, the Philippines, Thailand, or Myanmar could fall into China’s strategic orbit.
Many of these countries will look to the US as a strategic counterweight should China seek to assert local dominance.
But some may conclude that it is safer to steer closer to China than away from it, because their economies depend so strongly on Chinese trade.
As recent events in the East and South China Seas show, China sometimes attempts to strong-arm its neighbors.
The US will need to defend its allies and interests by pushing back, but with actions modulated to limit Chinese concerns.
China’s drive for economic and political leadership in East Asia, and its increased military capability there, is inevitable.
But the world can be confident that the US will remain stronger, wealthier, and more influential in global affairs than China even in 2030.
That argues against American overreaction, which could fuel the kind of self-reinforcing downward spiral in bilateral relations that occurred between Great Britain and Germany prior to the conflagrations of the first half of the twentieth century.
Perhaps the best way to avoid confrontation is to cooperate on shared external threats, most notably nuclear proliferation, global climate change, and Islamic extremism.
While the US is likely to maintain the upper hand in terms of military power for at least another 15-20 years, asymmetric warfare could undercut America’s advantage should China engage in cyber-attacks on US electronic and satellite systems, along with attacks on infrastructure.
In response to China’s capability to project power many hundreds of miles from its borders, the US (as I have suggested for the last 25 years) should develop a long-range bomber capable of penetrating sophisticated defenses and delivering great force.
As US security interests shift to the Pacific, Americans now rely on increasingly vulnerable forward land bases and carrier fleets with tactical aircraft that have a combat radius of 300-500 miles (482-805 kilometers).
But a long-range bomber would be more cost-effective than standoff bombers with cruise missiles, and, unlike shorter-range tactical bombers, its bases would be invulnerable to attack.
That said, America’s most serious challenge right now is to get the US economy and its governance in order.
But, unless and until it does, thereby giving President Barack Obama a firm basis from which to engage Xi on issues requiring international statesmanship, the prospect of trouble between the US and China will continue to grow.
POTSDAM – The philosopher Daniel Dennett once compared science to the construction of a huge pyramid.
Its base comprises the mass of well-established knowledge – no longer controversial and seldom discussed outside academia.
More recent research is piled toward the top of the pyramid, where most public debate takes place.
It is an apt metaphor for climate-change research, and one worth bearing in mind with the publication of the latest report of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
The IPCC’s fifth report, the product of several years of work by hundreds of climate scientists around the world, reviews our established understanding of climate change and explains more recent findings.
The media understandably tend to focus on the latter – like the much higher sea-level rise predictions compared to the previous IPCC report of 2007.
But let us step back from the news cycle to look at the solid knowledge base of our pyramid.
Climate research dates back at least two centuries, to Joseph Fourier’s discovery of the effects of greenhouse gases on planetary climates; in 1859, John Tyndall demonstrated in his laboratory which gases cause this effect.
Detailed radiation measurements on the ground and from satellites have since proved the greenhouse effect’s existence.
We also know beyond doubt that emissions from human activities have substantially increased the amount of greenhouse gases (especially carbon dioxide) in our atmosphere.
When the first IPCC report was published in 1990, the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere had reached 354 parts per million (up from the preindustrial baseline of 280 ppm).
This year, the concentration of atmospheric CO2 crossed the 400 ppm line for the first time.
CO2 levels are already far higher than they have been in a million years, as ancient air bubbles trapped in the Antarctic ice show.
We know that the amount of greenhouse gases is rising due to our emissions, and we know that this is causing warming.
The most telling number here is the “climate sensitivity” – that is, the degree of global warming caused by a doubling of atmospheric CO2.
IPCC reports have consistently given a range of 1.5-4.5ºC (with a minor exception in the fourth report, which gave a range of 2.0-4.5ºC).
Natural climate changes in the past – for example the great ice ages – attest to the sensitivity of our planet’s climate to disturbances, and analyzing them is one method used by scientists to estimate this sensitivity.
An extraordinary, if underappreciated, feature of the IPCC’s reports is that, though many different scientists have worked on them over the past 23 years, the fundamental conclusions have not changed.
Polls of climate researchers, as well as analysis of thousands of scientific publications, consistently show a 97-98% consensus that human-caused emissions are causing global warming.
Yet these conclusions need to be reaffirmed in the face of efforts by well-funded special-interest groups to sow doubt among the public.
Indeed, these efforts have been so successful that few members of the public are aware of the scientific consensus on the fundamentals of climate change.
The past can serve as a guide to the consequences of the warming that we are causing.
Scientists studying paleoclimate – the climates of the ancient past – have documented the massive impact of earlier climatic changes.
At the end of the last Ice Age, for example, global temperature rose by about 5ºC over a period of 5,000 years.
This was enough to transform the Earth’s vegetation cover, melt two-thirds of the continental ice masses, and raise sea levels by more than a hundred meters.
A key conclusion of the new IPCC report is that sea-level rise has accelerated.
But, before millions of people are submerged, many will be struck by extreme weather events.
Record-breaking hot months now occur five times more frequently than they would in a stable, unchanging climate; these heat waves cause droughts, wild fires, poor harvests, and, inevitably, loss of life.
The latest IPCC report describes our current predicament with disturbing clarity: global temperatures are climbing, mountain glaciers and polar ice caps are melting, sea levels are rising, and extreme weather events are becoming more frequent and more severe.
The details near the top of the knowledge pyramid can and should be intensely debated.
But our solid understanding of the fundamentals of global warming – the base of our knowledge of climate science – should provide reason enough to press on with the implementation of carbon-free energy technologies.
With a rapid reduction in emissions, it is still possible to keep warming within safe bounds (estimated at below 2ºC); but the task is becoming increasingly difficult.
Failure to act quickly and globally will leave our children and grandchildren struggling to adapt to rapidly rising seas and devastating weather.
NEW YORK – What purpose is Switzerland serving by jailing the renowned Franco-Polish film director Roman Polanski on a 30-year-old warrant?
Arrested in 1977 for allegedly raping a 13-year-old girl in Los Angeles, Polanski pleaded guilty to the lesser offense of having unlawful sex with a minor.
In the belief that his judge, the late Laurence J. Rittenband, would renege on his promise to let Polanski go free after serving 42 days in a California prison, the director fled the United States in 1978 before his final sentence was announced.
Since then, the victim of Polanski’s sex crime, Samantha Geimer, publicly forgave him, and expressed her wish for the charges to be withdrawn.
So the reason to pursue the case now can have nothing to do with the rights or feelings of the victim.
Nor is Polanski, a married father of two children with no other criminal record, likely to repeat his offenses.
So the good of society is not served by forcing him to return to LA for a trial.
Common sense would seem to leave no other conclusion than that his arrest – in a country that is obliged by treaty to extradite fugitives from US justice – serves no purpose at all.
Yet the reactions to his sad plight, especially in France, have been oddly shrill.
The French foreign minister, Bernard Kouchner, called Polanski’s arrest “sinister.”
Fréderic Mitterand, the culture minister, spoke of “a scary America that has just shown its face.”
The former culture minister, Jack Lang, said the “American system of justice had run amok.”
He added that it was like “an infernal machine” that advances “blindly.”
Infernal or not, one might argue that justice is supposed to be blind, in the sense that no one – not even the greatest filmmaker – is above the law or entitled to escape from it.
Yet that is precisely what many people, including his colleagues in the film world – for example, Pedro Almodovar, Wim Wenders, and Ettore Scola – are claiming.
They believe that it is “inadmissible” for an artist of Polanski’s stature to be arrested for what he did.
Polanski is a French citizen, and France is probably more indulgent towards its great artists than is the US.
In 1943, after a life of petty crime, the writer Jean Genet faced another prison sentence for theft, when Jean Cocteau declared that Genet was a literary genius.
A French court, afraid of being too hard on a master of letters, reduced his sentence.
Allowing recognized artists to get away with behavior that would not be tolerated in lesser men is a tribute France pays to superior talent.
(Think of Oscar Wilde, who, like Polanski, found refuge in Paris.)
The Americans, and to an extent the British, sometimes pay a different kind of tribute to famous artists.
If they are caught misbehaving, they are often treated with particular harshness by courts and the popular media alike.
This is a form of populism: it shows that even the most famous people are no better than us – and it sells newspapers (or, nowadays, generates Web traffic).
A particularly nasty example was the case of “Fatty” Arbuckle, a great comedy actor in Hollywood’s silent-movie era.
When a girl claimed to have been raped at one of his parties in 1921, and then died a few days later, Arbuckle was pilloried in the press, and sentenced for rape and murder twice.
The girl was a known blackmailer, and she died of causes that had nothing to do with her sex life.
But Arbuckle’s career was ruined, the victim of an ambitious prosecutor and a popular press that made money out of scandals.
Polanski was not innocent, but he, too, may have fallen victim to the same combination of a judge’s desire to bring down a famous man and a sensation-starved media.
Perhaps the US is not as civilized as France, but it is more democratic.
And, while equal treatment under the law obviously is one of democracy’s more commendable features, the zeal of elected officials and mass media that pander to popular opinion in their treatment of talented artists is the ugly face of democracy.
The great French observer of American democracy, Alexis de Tocqueville, saw this face of American democracy in the 1830’s, noting that “Americans are so enamored of equality that they would rather be equal in slavery than unequal in freedom.”
The price for American-style democracy, he wrote, was artistic mediocrity and public conformity.
This, too, was an exaggeration, but Tocqueville had a point.
If too much deference to great artists is the mark of a society that has never quite escaped from its aristocratic roots, too little regard for them is a sign of narrow philistinism.
In an ideal world, he would agree to return to Los Angeles, face his judges, and hope that his case will be dismissed.
And he would then be free to go wherever he likes in the remaining years of his life.
Alas, the world is not ideal, and Polanski might find the risk of incarceration in a US prison too high.
If he decides to resist being tried in a court of law, like any other offender, this would be understandable.
AMMAN – Without much fanfare, the past few months have seen no anti-American demonstrations and no burning of American flags across the Arab world.
Arabs seem increasingly willing to accept – and even applaud – the Obama administration’s policy toward the region.
Of course, Arabs are still unhappy with the United States’ continued bias towards Israel.
Its inability to end the 44-year military occupation of Palestinian lands has not gone unnoticed.
With the exception of the Obama administration’s lack of resolve in denouncing the treatment of protesters by the US-allied regimes in Bahrain and Yemen, America’s position on the Arab revolts has been welcomed.
Arabs, especially young Arabs, who comprise the majority of the region’s population, look up to America for its global power when it upholds democratic morals and values.
There is high respect for the concept of rule of, by, and for the people, as well as for the US Constitution’s guarantee of freedom of expression.
It is precisely the failure to apply these values in areas such as Palestine or Iraq that has made – and can still make – countless Arabs vehemently anti-American.
President Barack Obama’s election two years ago positively shocked Arabs and empowered Arab democrats, who saw it as proof of America’s true democratic nature.
Obama’s Cairo speech, delivered on one of his first foreign trips, promised a new US-Arab beginning, and certainly invigorated Arab democrats.
A US veto of a Security Council resolution – supported by the Council’s 14 other members – to oppose Israeli settlements seemed to signal that Obama had crumbled under pressure from America’s pro-Israel lobby.
The US had not revised its policy, even with an African immigrant’s son living in the White House.
A more positive view of Obama emerged when the Arab revolts began in Tunisia and Egypt –countries with pro-US regimes.
While the US initially demonstrated prudence in word and deed, it quickly understood that the revolts truly reflected the will of the people and acted to align itself with the democratic cause.
The same people that Obama had called on in his Cairo speech to seek democracy had now formed the most important nonviolent movement the world had seen in decades.
Arab youth had finally moved, and Obama and his team made the right statements to encourage them, while also making it clear to the Egyptian and Tunisian regimes that they could no longer hide behind the claim that they were fighting America’s war in north Africa.
Pulling away from dictators without trying to take credit for or hijack the revolt was exactly what was required.
All that what was wanted from America, most of the young people thought, was withdrawal of its support for allies like Hosni Mubarak and other Arab dictators.
The same energy on display in Cairo and Tunis was evident among Libyan youth, but this time, America was able to do little diplomatically because it had no relationship with Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi.
So, no surprise, the energy of Libyan youth ran head-on into Qaddafi’s inclination toward brutality and, more importantly, into his paid mercenaries.
Another type of help was needed, but deciding what form it should take was complicated.
Arab countries, especially Egypt, had hundreds of thousands of their nationals working in Libya.
But what the Arab countries couldn’t do with military support, they were able to do by providing political cover for the military intervention led by the US, Britain, and France.
The Gulf countries, which have no citizens working in Libya, were the first to denounce Qaddafi.
With angry young Arabs from different countries demonstrating outside its Cairo offices and demanding support for their Libyan brethren, the Arab League took an uncharacteristic position: it agreed to denounce a fellow Arab leader.
Clearly, the Arab world was changing, and the US was suddenly no longer an enemy, but a friend.
After gaining Security Council support, the US, Europe, and some Arab countries began doing exactly what should be expected of the international community when a government is preparing to butcher its own citizens: prevent the slaughter.
Of course, America’s problems with Arabs and its challenges in the Middle East are far from over.
Obama must still fulfill his promises to celebrate with Palestinians their full membership of the UN this fall and to draw down its forces in Afghanistan.
Instead, with America’s help, they are enjoying the first blush of freedom.
CAMBRIDGE – Major tax reform is high on the agenda for the United States in 2017.
The Republican-controlled House of Representatives has been preparing for this for years, creating detailed plans for overhauling how corporate and personal income are taxed.
Now, with a Republican majority in the Senate and a Republican president in the White House, those plans can provide the basis for legislative action.
I believe it will have a highly favorable impact on business investment, raising productivity and overall economic growth.
Although none of the proposed changes is guaranteed, the likely shape of the proposed tax package is becoming clear.
The House Republicans and the Trump administration have both proposed halving that rate, which would cause capital to shift to corporate investment from real estate, unincorporated businesses, and foreign holdings.
With corporate-tax revenue currently equal to 2% of GDP, the proposed rate cut would reduce revenue by about 1% of GDP, or $190 billion a year in today’s economy.
The resulting increase in investment would boost growth and lower the revenue loss; but congressional Republicans, who favor a revenue-neutral tax reform, would still face a challenge.
The US is unique among industrial countries in subjecting repatriated profits earned by its companies’ foreign subsidiaries to the full domestic tax rate (with a credit for tax paid to the foreign government).
Thus, a US firm that earns a profit in Ireland pays a 12% tax to the Irish government and would now pay an additional 23% on any repatriated profits.
Adopting a territorial system would increase investment in the US, stimulating productivity and growth.
The proposal would allow all future foreign profits of US corporations to be repatriated without any extra tax.
The $2.1 trillion of previously accumulated overseas profits would be subject to a one-time tax of about 10%, to be paid over several years.
This means two things: allowing companies to deduct all investments in equipment and structures immediately, instead of spreading the cost over time; and eliminating the deduction for interest costs on newly incurred debts.
This would reduce the risk caused by high-debt ratios and put debt and equity on an equal footing.
I doubt that Congress will actually enact this reform when it digs into the operational details.
When is a loan a new loan, and when is it just a continuation of an existing line of credit?
What happens when companies shift from borrowing to finance an equipment purchase to leasing that equipment?
Unlike most other countries, the US does not have a value-added tax.
The border tax adjustment would give the US the international advantage of a value-added tax without levying that tax on domestic transactions.
Here’s how it would work: Companies that import goods would not be allowed to deduct those imports’ cost in calculating their taxable profits.
With a 20% corporate tax rate, that would be equivalent to a 20% import tax.
Companies that export goods would be able to exclude the export earnings from taxable income, equivalent to a 20% export subsidy.
Although it looks like this would reduce imports and increase exports, that will not happen.
As every economics student learns, the trade balance depends on the difference between domestic saving and domestic investment.
Because the border tax adjustment does not change saving and investment, it wouldn’t change imports and exports.
Instead, the changes in taxes on imports and exports would lead to a rise in the value of the dollar that offsets the direct impact of the border tax changes.
More specifically, if the border tax adjustment is adopted, the dollar will increase by 25% relative to other currencies.
A 25% rise in the dollar lowers the cost of imports by 20% (just enough to offset the increase in import prices caused by the 20% tax), while raising the cost of US exports to foreign buyers (just enough to offset the implied 20% subsidy).
But if the border tax adjustment would not improve the US trade balance, why are congressional Republicans eager to enact it?
The real reason that it would boost tax revenue substantially, without increasing the burden on US consumers or producers.
Currently, US imports and exports are 15% and 12% of GDP, respectively.
Given the difference of 3% of GDP, the 20% import tax and 20% export subsidy raises a net 0.6% of GDP, now equal to $120 billion a year.
The border tax adjustment therefore pays for about two-thirds of the $190 billion cost of the corporate tax cut, and an even larger share when the lower corporate rate’s favorable effect on growth is taken into account.
And, because there is no change in prices paid by American consumers or received by American exporters, that tax is borne by foreign producers, who, owing to the dollar’s appreciation, receive less in their own currencies for their exports to the US.
There is substantial opposition to the border tax adjustment among US importers who are not convinced that the dollar will strengthen enough to balance the higher implicit import tax.
But the prospect of raising more than $100 billion a year without hurting US consumers or producers will drive Congress to move forward with this feature of the overall plan.
This year’s legislation will be the first major reform of the US tax system in three decades.
Enacting it will produce a more favorable and competitive tax framework for American companies.
NEW HAVEN – The wrong medicine is being applied to America’s economy.
Having misdiagnosed the ailment, policymakers have prescribed untested experimental medicine with potentially grave side effects.
The patient is the American consumer – the world’s biggest by far, but now in the throes of the worst funk since the Great Depression.
Growth in inflation-adjusted US personal consumption expenditures has just been revised down to 1.5% in the second quarter of 2012, and appears to be on track for a similarly anemic increase in the third quarter.
Worse, these numbers are just the latest in what has now been a four-and-a-half-year-old trend.
From the first quarter of 2008 through the second quarter of 2012, annualized growth in real consumption spending has averaged a mere 0.7% – all the more extraordinary when compared with the pre-crisis trend of 3.6% in the decade ending in 2007.
The disease is a protracted balance-sheet recession that has turned a generation of America’s consumers into zombies – the economic walking dead.
Just as they wrote the script for the first of Japan’s lost decades, their counterparts are now doing the same for the US economy.
Since their collapse in 2007, US households have understandably become fixated on repairing the damage.
That means paying down debt and rebuilding savings, leaving consumer demand mired in protracted weakness.
Steeped in denial, the Federal Reserve is treating the disease as a cyclical problem – deploying the full force of monetary accommodation to compensate for what it believes to be a temporary shortfall in aggregate demand.
The convoluted logic behind this strategy is quite disturbing – not only for the US, but also for the global economy.
There is nothing cyclical about the lasting aftershocks of a balance-sheet recession that have now been evident for nearly five years.
The personal-saving rate stood at just 3.7% in August 2012 – up from the 1.5% low of 2005, but half the 7.5% average recorded in the last three decades of the twentieth century.
The overall level of household indebtedness stood at 113% of disposable personal income in mid-2012 – down 21 percentage points from its pre-crisis peak of 134% in 2007, but still well above the 1970-1999 norm of around 75%.
In other words, Americans have much farther to go on the road to balance-sheet repair – which hardly suggests a temporary, or cyclical, shortfall in consumer demand.
Moreover, the Fed’s approach is severely compromised by the so-called zero bound on interest rates.
Having run out of basis points to cut from interest rates, the Fed has turned to the quantity dimension of the credit cycle – injecting massive doses of liquidity into the collapsed veins of zombie consumers.
To rationalize the efficacy of this approach, the Fed has rewritten the script on the transmission mechanism of discretionary monetary policy.
Unlike the days of yore, when cutting the price of credit could boost borrowing, “quantitative easing” purportedly works by stimulating asset and credit markets.
The wealth effects generated by frothy financial markets are then presumed to rejuvenate long-dormant “animal spirits” and get consumers spending again, irrespective of lingering balance-sheet strains.
There is more: Once the demand problem is cured, according to this argument, companies will start hiring again.
And then, presto – an unconventional fix magically satisfies the Fed’s long-neglected mandate to fight unemployment.
But the Fed’s policy gambit has taken the US down the wrong road.
Indeed, the Fed has doubled down on an approach aimed at recreating the madness of an asset- and credit-dependent consumption model – precisely the mistake that pushed the US economy toward the abyss in 2003-2006.
Just as two previous rounds of quantitative easing failed to accelerate US households’ balance-sheet repair, there is little reason to believe that “QE3” will do the trick.
Quantitative easing is a blunt instrument, at best, and operates through highly circuitous – and thus dubious – channels.
Significantly, it does next to nothing to alleviate the twin problems of excess leverage and inadequate saving.
Policies aimed directly at debt forgiveness and enhanced saving incentives – contentious, to be sure – would at least address zombie consumers’ balance-sheet problems.
Many worry about an upsurge in inflation, though, given the outsize slack in the global economy – and the likelihood that it will persist for years to come – that is not high on my watch list.
Far more disconcerting is the willingness of major central banks – not just the Fed, but also the European Central Bank, the Bank of England, and the Bank of Japan – to inject massive amounts of excess liquidity into asset markets – excesses that cannot be absorbed by sluggish real economies.
That puts central banks in the destabilizing position of abdicating control over financial markets.
For a world beset by seemingly endemic financial instability, this could prove to be the most destructive development of all.
The developing world is up in arms over the major central banks’ reckless tactics.
Emerging economies’ leaders fear spillover effects in commodity markets and distortions of exchange rates and capital flows that may compromise their own focus on financial stability.
While it is difficult to track the cross-border flows fueled by quantitative easing in the so-called advanced world, these fears are far from groundless.
Liquidity injections into a zero-interest-rate developed world send return-starved investors scrambling for growth opportunities elsewhere.
As the global economy has gone from crisis to crisis in recent years, the cure has become part of the disease.
In an era of zero interest rates and quantitative easing, macroeconomic policy has become unhinged from a tough post-crisis reality.
Untested medicine is being used to treat the wrong ailment – and the chronically ill patient continues to be neglected.
ISTANBUL – President Barack Obama is arriving in Saudi Arabia at a critical moment for the country.
Its recent decision to withdraw its ambassador from Qatar has revealed the gravity of the crisis in the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), composed of the Kingdom’s most immediate neighbors.
Indeed, Gulf politics is shifting toward a new balance in the wake of the Saudi-UAE rapprochement and the recent attempt to isolate Qatar.
The UAE and Bahrain have joined Saudi Arabia in downgrading relations with Qatar.
This is an unusual move, considering the Gulf states’ tradition of treating political disagreements as a family matter, to be handled behind the scenes.
Oman is keeping its distance from the situation, while Kuwait has attempted to mediate between Saudi Arabia and Qatar.
Several factors are driving Saudi Arabia’s moves against Qatar, which include a ban prohibiting Saudi intellectuals from contributing to Qatari newspapers.
There is Qatar’s support for the Muslim Brotherhood (in Egypt and elsewhere); the speeches by the Islamic theologian Yusuf al-Qardawi and the broadcasting policy of Qatar-funded Al Jazeera since the Arab Spring; and the credence given to the view that Qatar is hosting Western institutions with the intent of orchestrating a coup in the Kingdom.
That view reflects Saudi Arabia’s tough stance against the Muslim Brotherhood, which it has declared a terrorist organization.
The Kingdom perceives the Brotherhood’s influence in Arab countries, particularly the Gulf states, as a serious threat to its internal stability and survival.
The voluntary abdication by Qatar’s Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani in June 2013, and his replacement as Emir by his son Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, failed to satisfy Saudi expectations of change in Qatari foreign policy.
And now the Kingdom has made it clear that it has reached the limits of its patience.
But Saudi Arabia’s attitude toward Qatar may generate some difficulties for its own policy.
There is considerable transnational movement of goods and services, and billions of dollars of cross-border investment, across the Gulf – economic activity that would be endangered by the GCC’s further disintegration.
The Muslim Brotherhood is not a violent organization, and it has not engaged in illegal activities in the Gulf countries.
Other GCC states, eager to avoid escalating political tensions in their own countries, are unlikely to declare it a terrorist organization.
Even Saudi Arabia’s special relationship with Jordan will not push its government to adopt such a declaration.
For the time being, harsh policies toward the Muslim Brotherhood are likely to be confined to Egypt and Saudi Arabia.
The problem for the Kingdom is that simply “correcting” the Qatari position cannot change the political trajectory within the region – particularly in Syria and Egypt.
Moreover, Saudi Arabia’s imposition of its preferred policies on the GCC, together with the possibility of sanctions on Qatar, risks jeopardizing all that the GCC (which already has fallen into political decline in the wake of the Arab Spring) has achieved over the past 33 years.
Although Qatar’s rulers are concerned about the Kingdom’s growing antipathy toward them, they have shown no indications of submitting to Saudi demands that they change course.
Moreover, given the impact on regional geopolitics of the recent interim nuclear deal between Iran and the West, Saudi Arabia’s alienation of its neighbors is all the more hazardous.
Making matters worse, it is clear that disagreements within the GCC can no longer be resolved behind closed doors, and that member states are unable to air them publicly without risking a diplomatic rupture.
Across the region, minorities are feeling more empowered and citizens are making ever-stronger demands for better government.
There is a burgeoning desire for a future that dispenses with traditional policies based on fear and anger.
In this context, Saudi policy seems to be stuck in the past, and the Kingdom has chosen to adopt a strategy of self-help in order to isolate itself from problems outside its borders, though it continues to regard itself as the region’s power broker.
The sudden rapprochement between Saudi Arabia and the UAE resulted not from the attractiveness of Saudi policy, but from their rulers’ shared perception that there is a dearth of political options.
It would, of course, be wiser to address the real problems facing GCC governments, which range from embittered minorities to economies that are unable to create enough jobs for young people.
But resolving these issues would require an inclusive and accommodating approach, both domestically and regionally, and Saudi Arabia, in particular, is not prepared to take that route.
The Gulf impasse will exacerbate the already-fragile situation in the Middle East.
Regional political realities, transnational interaction, and the common search for a better future should, eventually, prevail over policies geared for repression, discipline, and order.
The GCC should be accustomed to conflicting perspectives on regional design and differing degrees of cooperation across regional actors, and it should draw on these differences as a source of strength.
This crisis may create an opportunity to rethink and recalibrate GCC strategies, based on a more realistic view of regional interdependence, common security, and shared decision-making.
A new mentality in GCC governance could result in the creation of mechanisms of constructive engagement in the region, while maintaining cooperation with international actors.
Clearly, this policy would be more constructive than Saudi Arabia’s desire for a lone-wolf role that merely results in a deadlock within and around the Gulf.
WASHINGTON, DC – Across the Middle East and North Africa (MENA), technology hubs are emerging.
Whether it’s in the Beirut Digital District or the GrEEK campus in Cairo, some of the Middle East’s brightest minds are turning innovative ideas into marketable products.
When I visited the Beirut Digital District two months ago, and the GrEEK Campus startup hub before that, optimism was palpable – and for good reason.
In a region that has struggled to find its economic footing since the Arab Spring, the entrepreneurial ideas being refined at incubators like these hold the keys to the region’s future.
Startups anywhere contribute to job creation, competitiveness, higher productivity, and economic growth, while helping to reduce poverty and fight climate change.
And when energetic new companies bring innovative products and services to untapped markets, they contribute positively to private-sector development.
In the MENA region, several successful startups are already doing this, and more.
One example is Souq.com, an online retailer based in the United Arab Emirates that was purchased in March by Amazon.
Souq led a revolution in e-commerce in the region that has powered cross-border trade and improved consumer choice.
In Egypt, Fawry has developed a game-changing electronic payment system that has freed consumers and businesses from using cash.
More than 20 million Egyptians, including many small business owners, now use the service, which processes 1.5 million payments daily.
Unfortunately, at the moment, unsupportive business and regulatory environments are stifling the startup ecosystem.
Despite the value that smaller companies bring to the region’s customers and economies, first-time business owners too often are on their own.
For example, most new MENA businesses cannot access the credit needed to expand or hire workers.
The region has 23 million small- and medium-size enterprises (SMEs), accounting for roughly 90% of the private sector, but SMEs receive just 8% of total bank lending.
And capital-starved entrepreneurs have few other options; despite a growing number of accelerators and seed funds in the region, the venture capital market remains undeveloped.
Even well financed entrepreneurs face obstacles to growth, often due to a lack of experience.
There is little formal education for new entrepreneurs, and only a handful of networks support start-ups.
Gender bias, too, is a limiting factor; nearly every MENA economy fails to empower female employees and executives fully.
But much can be done to ensure that more startups in the region are able to make the leap from good idea to business success.
Start-ups take risks, yet existing regulations make it difficult to liquidate companies, deterring potential creditors and increasing the cost of debt.
An important part of these reforms is to abolish jail time for non-fraudulent bankruptcies, which remains a real threat for owners of small businesses throughout the region.
Moreover, many countries have labor laws that make it hard for businesses to recruit and terminate staff.
Addressing both challenges would help cash-strapped startups make every dollar count.
Finally, countries should revisit restrictions on foreign ownership and strengthen intellectual property laws to protect entrepreneurs’ hard-won innovations.
Entrepreneurs drive economic growth in ways that go far beyond online sales and e-payment solutions.
Nearly one in three young people in the region are unemployed, and those who do have jobs often work in the public sector, which is the largest employer throughout the Arab world.
In the Gulf States, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, and Tunisia, government jobs account for an unsustainably high 60-80% of formal employment.
Governments need to reassess this balance, and adopt reforms that unlock the potential of private businesses to grow and take on more employees.
Global development-finance institutions, like the World Bank Group – which includes my institution, the International Finance Corporation (IFC) – can provide a bridge between governments and the private sector.
The heart of the IFC’s strategy is to help develop new markets in low- and middle-income countries by encouraging private participation in what are often state-dominated economies.
In May, the IFC, together with the World Economic Forum, brought together 100 of the most promising startups in the Arab world, with the goal of beginning to address the bottlenecks that stifle entrepreneurship.
In time, it is companies like these that will deliver sustainable economic growth to the region, and create employment opportunities for millions of people.
That is the kind of future that Arab innovators, like those I met at the World Economic Forum in Jordan, know is possible.
NEW DELHI – There is something about the number five in Sino-Indian relations.
Asia’s two giants have long defined their relationship in terms of the famous Pancha Sheela: mutual respect for each other’s territorial integrity and sovereignty; mutual non-aggression; mutual non-interference in each other’s internal affairs; equality and mutual benefit; and peaceful co-existence.
Now China’s new leaders have enunciated a new Pancha Sheela, with President Xi Jinping offering a “five-point proposal” for Sino-Indian relations.
The updated principles would maintain strategic communication and healthy bilateral relations; harness each other’s strengths and expand cooperation in infrastructure, investment, and other areas; deepen cultural ties and increase mutual understanding and friendship; expand coordination and collaboration in multilateral affairs to safeguard developing countries’ legitimate interests and address global challenges; and accommodate each other’s core concerns and reconcile bilateral disagreements amicably.
Only the fifth point is tricky, for it leaves China’s “core concerns” undefined.
Traditionally, these were Tibet and Taiwan, but Chinese officials have recently referred to their claims on the South China Sea as a “core interest” as well.
This has opened a Pandora’s box for China, and has facilitated America’s rediscovery of Asia.
India, like many other countries with economic interests in the Pacific, wants freedom of maritime navigation to be assured, with no threat of a Chinese veto.
Indeed, China must be mindful of India’s “core interests” as well, especially because it has grievously damaged at least one such interest by enabling Pakistan to develop nuclear weapons.
China’s investment in strategic assets like the Gwadar Port in Pakistan has reinforced India’s anxiety.
While China cannot be blamed, perhaps not even implicated, in the growing tendency of India’s South Asian neighbors to play the “China card,” India cannot remain oblivious to this trend.
With that caveat, India should welcome Xi’s five principles, for they recognize the two countries’ new and growing economic relationship and global cooperation.
This in itself would be a good starting point for Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh’s conversation with Xi at this week’s BRICS summit in Durban, South Africa.
Over the past nine years, Singh has enunciated his own five principles for Sino-Indian relations.
The first principle concerns the border issue, and Singh stated it at his first meeting with then-Prime Minister Wen Jiabao in Vientiane, Laos, in November 2004.
Singh told Wen that India was willing to find an accommodation with China on the border question, and that any agreement must take into account “ground realities.”
Singh’s second principle, often erroneously attributed to Wen, who subsequently repeated it on several occasions, is that “the world has enough space for the growth ambitions of both countries.”
In other words, the rise of China, followed by India – fully two-fifths of the world’s population – does not imply a conflict-ridden zero-sum game.
On the contrary, Singh’s third principle is that the rise of China and India could amount to providing a global public good.
Addressing the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences in January 2008, Singh foresaw the possibility of positive externalities for the world as a whole from the rise of China and India, owing to the new opportunities for development that they could bring, especially to other developing countries.
Singh’s fourth principle is that, both because of and despite all of the above, the bilateral relationship will be characterized by elements of both cooperation and competition.
While there is space for both countries to rise, and while that may benefit the global economy and offer opportunities for other forms of cooperation – for example, on climate change and energy security – the potential for competition for markets, resources, and influence should not be ignored.
The fifth principle is a more general norm of national security: a country’s policy toward another is defined not just by intentions, but also by capabilities.
Thus, it is not what one country’s political leaders say, but what they are capable of doing, that should guide other countries’ policy toward it.
Even as Indian leaders accept all of China’s assurances, they cannot afford to remain indifferent to China’s rising capability to create problems for India.
On the question of intention versus capability, former US President Ronald Reagan had the last word.
When asked if he could trust his Soviet counterparts when they promised to reduce their nuclear capabilities, Reagan famously said that he would “trust, but verify.”
That was precisely Singh’s reply when he was asked if he could trust Pakistan’s former President Pervez Musharraf, and it should be any Indian leader’s response to assurances offered by China’s leaders.
There is another concern that ought to engage both leaders: How will developments in the global economy, especially the transatlantic slowdown and the emergence of religious and other extremist politics in Asia affect not only their own countries’ rise, but also that of Asia as a whole?
Conflict in Asia, whether in the South China Sea or in western Asia, serves neither side’s interests.
China and India cannot afford to remain reticent observers while Asia burns around them, mired in sectarianism, terrorism, violence, and instability.
Likewise, it does not serve China’s interests to unnerve the countries of Southeast Asia, playing one against another.
Nor is a Sino-Japanese conflict over the East China Sea in the interests of the rest of Asia.
Rather, China and Japan should work together to build a new regional architecture for sustained economic growth and security.
China and India have a responsibility to work with other Asian powers, including the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, Japan, Russia, and the US, to ensure peace, prosperity, and stability in the region.
Many principles of cooperative engagement can – and should – be crafted from the difficult challenges that Asia’s two giants confront.
Little more than a decade ago, people spoke of the end of history, of the final, unchallengeable triumph of free markets and democracy.
But public opinion in a number of countries now seems to be turning against democracy, argues Bronislaw Geremek, Poland's former foreign minister, and proposes ways in which this trend might be reversed.
Eight of the countries that will enter the European Union in May 2004 were until recently governed by totalitarian dictatorships and enslaved by another nation.
The return of governments based on the will of the majority of their citizens seemed for decades an unattainable dream in these countries, much as it remains a dream for the citizens of Burma under the rule of its military junta.
The Pew Global Attitudes Project for 2003 highlights countries in which few people recognize the importance of elections: 28% in Jordan, 37% in Russia, 40% in Indonesia.
Given the choice between a democratic government and a strong leader, 70% of Russians, 67% of Ukrainians, and 44% of Poles and Bulgarians opt for the latter.
In Latin America, only in Venezuela is support for democracy unambiguously dominant (79%).
In other Latin American countries, support for a strong leader either is stronger or nearly as strong as support for democracy.
An opinion poll in Israel shows that the majority of Israelis opt for democracy, but there is a downward trend there as well.
Five years ago, 90% of Israelis supported democracy; today the number is 77%.
Suicide bombers, the prolonged state of tension, and the overall weakening of the hope for peace have slashed support for democratic government.
In Asia, people in most countries still believe that a ¡°good democracy¡± is more important than a ¡°strong economy.¡± The opposite is true, however, in democratic Indonesia, where 69% prefer a strong economy.
Even in a number of European countries with old democratic traditions, a wave of populist, radical political parties opposed to minorities and immigrants has achieved success, sometimes even winning elections.
In other European countries, which have only recently embarked on the democratic path, a truly stunning change of mood is visible.
In Russia's recent parliamentary elections, which were - regardless of various reservations - conducted according to democratic standards, parties advocating political and economic freedom suffered painful defeat, while parties proclaiming hostility to the rule of law and modern pluralist democracy were successful.
In December's parliamentary election in Serbia, the extreme nationalist Radical Party achieved the greatest success, and people being tried before the International War Crimes Tribunal in The Hague, such as Vojislav Seslj, the Radicals' founder and long-time leader, and Slobodan Milosevic, were elected to parliament.
These results demonstrate the grave dangers that young democracies face, as well as the fragility of democratic culture.
They are also a failure of human beings: democratic values do not function without citizens; there can be no democracy without democrats.
This poses dramatic questions about the place of democratic values in international affairs, about the effectiveness of action in support of democracy, and about the way in which democracy is to be understood.
First, almost no one disputes the claim that democracy serves the cause of peace, but little is being done to make democracy - together with human rights - a basis of the international order.
A step was made in this direction in June 2000, when the Community of Democracy, bringing together more than half of the member states of the United Nations, was created in Warsaw.
The creation of that body was an important step, because it introduced a set of criteria that must be fulfilled by countries that want to call themselves democratic.
The organization promised to monitor the behavior of members and thus create a chance for coordinated support of the democratic order.
It amounted to an agreement that the continuing absence of democracy in many parts of the world is a disgrace.
Second, as the Pew poll suggests, today's weakening of democratic culture usually takes the form of nostalgia for strong leadership - a clear incitement to launching coups.
The weapons of shame and international opprobrium should be mustered to make it impossible for any democratic nation to legitimize a coup in another democratic country.
It should become a principle of international relations that democracy and democratization must be supported in all situations; that democratic societies should forego any opportunistic benefits that may come from supporting the enemies of democracy.
Nowadays, a more telling test of the vitality of a democracy is respect for the rights of minorities, recognition of the supremacy of the principles of the rule of law, and the acceptance of legal equality among citizens.
Pericles, in his speech about democracy, as recorded by Thucydides, expressed a timely thought: ¡°Guided by tolerance in private life, we respect the law in public life; we obey all laws, especially those unwritten ones, laws that defend those to whom injustice is being done, and laws the transgression of which brings universal disgrace.¡± That ancient sense of the potent power of shame should be employed today, lest the democratic tide continue to run out.
MUMBAI – As India gears up for its general election next month, it has some cause to celebrate: extreme poverty is finally in retreat.
In 2012 – two decades after the government launched a series of economic reforms aimed at opening up the economy – the official poverty rate had reached 22%, less than half the rate in 1994.
Escaping abject destitution, though an important milestone, is not the same as achieving a decent standard of living and sense of economic security.
Indeed, the extent of the task is reflected in a new McKinsey Global Institute report, “From Poverty to Empowerment,” which uses an innovative analytical framework, the “empowerment line,” to estimate the cost to the average citizen of fulfilling eight basic needs: food, energy, housing, potable water, sanitation, health care, education, and social security.
According to this metric, 56% of Indians in 2012 “lacked the means to meet essential needs.”
Remarkably, this number is more than 2.5 times larger than the number of people still living below the poverty line in India.
Even more striking is that the “empowerment gap” – that is, the additional consumption required to bring these 680 million people to the empowerment line – is seven times larger than the cost of eliminating extreme poverty.
Furthermore, while the empowerment line is a measure of individual consumption, a household’s ability or willingness to spend is not sufficient to guarantee a decent life.
People also need access to community-level infrastructure like health clinics, schools, power grids, and sanitation systems.
But the average Indian household lacks access to 46% of basic services, with the severity of the gaps varying widely across districts.
What can India’s government do to provide its citizens with the dignity, comfort, and security that they deserve?
Given that roughly half of current public spending on social programs fails to deliver better outcomes for the poor, simply directing more funds through existing channels is unlikely to have much of an impact.
Instead, policymakers should focus on supporting employment and productivity gains – historically the most potent weapons against poverty.
If economic growth remains on its current trajectory, with no major reforms, more than one-third of the population will remain below the empowerment line in 2022, with 12% still trapped in extreme poverty.
To avoid such an outcome, India’s government should pursue a set of bold reforms that boost growth by encouraging businesses to invest, scale up, and hire.
· The addition of 115 million non-agricultural jobs over the next decade to absorb the growing pool of workers and accelerate the shift toward more modern industries.
· A doubling of agricultural productivity growth, in order to raise India’s farm yields to the levels achieved in other emerging Asian countries.
· A doubling of real (inflation-adjusted) public spending on social services over ten years, with much of the increase allocated to fill gaps in health care, the provision of clean drinking water, and sanitation.
With the right set of measures, more than half a billion people could cross the threshold of consumption required for an economically empowered life, and Indians could gain access to more than 80% of the basic services they need by 2022.
Jobs and productivity growth could contribute 75% of the potential gains, while increased public spending alone, without measures to improve its effectiveness, would contribute less than 10%.
To realize this potential, policymakers should eliminate arcane regulations that handcuff businesses; accelerate infrastructure projects; make the labor market more flexible; remove market distortions; and expand vocational training for the poor and uneducated.
At the same time, they should work to place the efficiency of all public spending on par with that in India’s best-performing states.
All of this demands a strong commitment to better governance and a relentless focus on outcomes.
Common-sense strategies – such as improving coordination among the plethora of ministries and departments that comprise the bureaucracy, and establishing accountable and empowered agencies to deliver results in high-priority areas – could go a long way toward meeting this demand.
Moreover, technology could be used to streamline government services and render them more transparent.
Finally, closer engagement with private- and social-sector actors and local communities could help to increase efficiency, while reducing the burden on the public sector.
With strong and sustained political will and results-oriented policies, India’s government can deliver it.
WASHINGTON, DC – The shocking thing about nuclear weapons is that they seem to have lost their power to shock.
While the nuclear deal that was just reached with Iran in Lausanne might suggest otherwise and is very good news, that effort should not obscure the bad news elsewhere.
The momentum toward a nuclear-weapon-free world driven by US President Barack Obama’s landmark 2009 speech in Prague, having faltered for the last few years, has now gone into sharp reverse.
When Russia annexed Crimea last year, President Vladimir Putin announced his readiness to put Russian nuclear forces on alert, and even signaled plans to “surprise the West with our new developments in offensive nuclear weapons.”
Meanwhile, China and India are steadily increasing the size of their nuclear arsenals, and Pakistan is doing so even faster, even spelling out plans to combine battlefield nukes with conventional weapons.
For its part, the United States plans to spend $355 billion upgrading and modernizing its vast nuclear arsenal over the next ten years.
Far from moving toward disarmament, the intention seems to be to maintain and enhance every component of America’s current land, sea, and airborne nuclear capability.
There was more amusement than alarm at a conference of 800 nuclear specialists in Washington, DC, in March, when a senior Air Force general, eerily channeling George C. Scott in “Dr. Strangelove,” offered a nostrils-bared defense of “an ability to allow no adversary to have sanctuary anywhere in the world.”
Spooked by Russia’s incursions into Ukraine, North Korea’s erratic intransigence, and China’s new foreign-policy assertiveness, US allies and partners in East Asia and Europe have rushed back to unthinking embrace of Cold War assumptions about the deterrent utility of nuclear weapons and their central importance in security policy.
As my colleagues and I put it in our book-length report Nuclear Weapons: The State of Play 2015, launched in Geneva, Vienna, and Washington in March: “On the evidence of the size of their weapons arsenals, fissile material stocks, force modernization plans, stated doctrine and known deployment practices, all nine nuclear-armed states foresee indefinite retention of nuclear weapons and a continuing role for them in their security policies.”
All of this has serious implications for the five-year review conference of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), scheduled to begin in New York in late April.
The NPT has been the single most crucial factor in limiting the world’s nuclear-armed states to the current nine, rather than the 20-30 widely feared a generation ago.
The NPT, after all, is based on a bargain: states that do not possess nuclear weapons promise not to acquire them, in exchange for a pledge by those that do to move seriously toward eliminating their arsenals.
And recent developments have once again jeopardized that bargain, with many states again asking why, if the US, Russia, and others need nuclear weapons, they do not.
Given such sentiments, it will prove almost impossible at the review conference to build a consensus in favor of further necessary strengthening of the non-proliferation regime, with improved safeguards, export controls, security disciplines, and sanctions against withdrawal from the treaty.
Aside from the Iran negotiations, other arms control cooperation is continuing, including between the US and Russia over the New START treaty to reduce strategic deployments, and over chemical weapons in Syria.
Despite lack of any visible progress toward ridding the Middle East of weapons of mass destruction, the signs are encouraging that Egypt and others in the region want to keep trying, and will not use the issue of a WMD-free zone to blow up the review conference, as had been feared.
Most encouraging of all, a major new international movement is gathering pace to focus policy attention on the horrific humanitarian consequences of any use of nuclear weapons, and to create the conditions for a treaty to ban them once and for all.
Since 2012, major conferences have been hosted by Norway, Mexico, and Austria, and more than 155 states have pledged support for appropriate action, with only the nuclear-armed states and their allies and partners dragging their feet.
The nuclear-armed states will not sign on any time soon to any treaty that bans the use of their weapons under all circumstances.
They will resist even more strongly the outright elimination of their weapons, given that the world is probably still decades away from devising sufficient verification and enforcement measures.
But if the NPT review conference is not to end in tears, with all the accompanying risks for world order that failure would entail, the five nuclear-armed states that are NPT signatories can and must be prepared to bring more to the table than they have so far.
Baby steps – improving their transparency in reporting, or agreeing on the meaning of technical terms like “strategic,” “deployed,” and “reserve” – will not begin to satisfy the many NPT countries that have been appalled by the recent re-emergence of Cold War mindsets and behavior.
The nuclear-armed states can and should make serious commitments to dramatic further reductions in the size of their arsenals; hold the number of weapons physically deployed and ready for immediate launch to an absolute minimum; and change their strategic doctrines to limit the role and salience of nuclear weapons, ideally by committing to “no first use.”
Most important, they should agree on indicative target dates – from five to 15 years – for achieving all of these initial objectives.
Deadlines have been indispensable for achieving sustainable-development and carbon-reduction goals: saving the world from the threat of nuclear annihilation is hardly a less urgent and important objective.
Now that the dust of the Gulf War has settled over the Middle East, it is clear that some unexpected winners have emerged, blinking in the sunlight.
Across the Gulf, Shia Muslims are waking up to their growing political power, their ability to organize themselves - and the gift that lies literally under their feet.
After years of repression at the hands of Saddam Hussein, the Iraqi Shia are tasting freedom - and spurring their religious counterparts throughout the Gulf to become more assertive.
They’ve also woken up to the accident of geography that has placed the world’s major oil supplies in areas where they form the majority - Iran, the Eastern Province of Saudi Arabia, Bahrain and southern Iraq.
Their new-found power in this volatile region therefore represents a major challenge to both the old Sunni ruling establishments - outside Iran - and to the United States.
Will they be ruled by bearded men in turbans and veiled women - or will we see suits and high heels?
It wasn’t until 1979 that the Shia first appeared on western radar screens, emerging in Iran, at the head of a violent revolution that murdered thousands and despatched the Shah into history.
In Western eyes they became the hostile and militant face of Islam, intent on exporting violence.
Their Sunni counterparts, even the most fundamentalist Wahhabis of Saudi Arabia, appeared by contrast nicely tame.
But the terrorist attacks on America of September 11, 2001 rewrote that idea for good.
Their hosts - the Taliban were also Sunni, so are all the prisoners at Guantanamo Bay.
In the space of a few months, therefore, Sunni Muslims took over from the Shia as threat number one.
But then minorities - especially with a history of subjugation - always do, because it allows them to express their cultural identity and religious freedom.
In Saudi Arabia, the Shia are at the forefront of those welcoming democratic change and participation.
Although they constitute only 20% of the total Saudi population, they form a majority -75% - of the population in the oil-rich region.
Saudi Arabia’s Shia have suffered discrimination in the professions: in the military, in high government positions, the diplomatic corps, and most significantly, in the oil industry, where they have been excluded since the 1980’s.
This systematic neutering of the Shia in Saudi Arabia is legitimised by the Wahhabi religious establishment and supported by numerous fatwas denouncing them as heretics.
In Bahrain, the Shia who form 75% of the population have been keen on the reforms initiated by King Hamad Al-Khalifah.
They have opted for political power under the Sunni minority rather than associating with Iran’s form of government.
But the new generation of Bahraini Shia are more militant, and their views are increasingly echoed by their Shia counterparts in Saudi Arabia.
It was the threat of Shia militancy, exported from Iran, that led the region’s rulers to set up the Gulf Cooperation Council in 1981 and attempt to pool their strengths.
There was a coup attempt in Bahrain that same year, which came hard on the heels of a Shia uprising in Saudi Arabia the year before.
In any case none of the Iraqi Ayatollahs who were once exiled in Iran, have any inclination to adopt the Iranian model.
So far the Shia in Iraq have been relatively quiet, watching the de-Ba’athification process and biding their time.
It is on the insistence of the Shia that the United States has had to continually rewrite its blueprint for Iraq.
From being the region’s losers of the last few decades, the Shia now have the chance to redress the balance, settle old scores - and control the wealth of Petrolistan.
But they won’t succeed without a struggle - that may in turn be long and bloody.
In 2010, life expectancy in Botswana is expected to drop to about 30 years if the AIDS epidemic remains unchecked.
Can the unfolding revolution in genomics (the study not of individual genes but of all genes as an entity) and biotechnology be harnessed to reduce these inequities?
We believe the answer is a qualified ``Yes,'' if certain conditions are met.
First, we must not mistakenly view genomics/biotechnology as ``high-tech,'' expensive and therefore irrelevant for developing countries.
Vaccines were and still are high-tech, but their cost has come down and they have made a huge impact in developing countries.
The ongoing sequencing of the genomes of malaria, the tubercle bacillus, leprosy, hepatitis viruses and HIV raises serious hopes of better vaccines in the future.
Edible vaccines from transgenic plants are likely to be more useful for developing countries than for developed ones because they avoid the need for refrigeration.
Second, developing country concerns must be kept at the forefront of discussions about the potential benefits of genomics and biotechnology.
People who protest against globalization in places like Genoa are unlikely to die of hunger in Somalia.
For example, Hassan Adamu, Nigeria's former Minister of Agricultural and Rural Development has noted: ``It is possible to kill someone with kindness, literally.
That could be the result of the well-meaning but extremely misguided attempts by European and North American groups that advise Africans to be wary of agricultural biotechnology.''
Third, we must build on the research strengths and human capital of developing countries.
For example, Cuba has a significant biotechnology industry: it developed the only effective meningitis B vaccine (which, despite the embargo, is imported into the US); and in 1998 it produced 30 tons of transgenic tilapia fish.
Income from Cuba's biotechnology exports is sufficient to sustain Cuba's biotech research and development expenditure.
India, Brazil, China and several other developing countries also have serious research and development efforts in biotechnology.
The African Centre for Technology Studies in Nairobi is influential internationally and already plays an important policy research and capacity-strengthening role.
It recently became clear that one key to success is to forge mutually beneficial collaborations with well established and successful institutions wherever they may be, not just between neighboring countries.
One of the developing world's least leveraged resources is its human capital working overseas, often in leadership positions in academia and industry.
India successfully drew from this resourceful pool in the ``diaspora'' to become one of the world's leading exporters of software.
Fourth, we must broaden the concept of human security, introduced into the UN Security Council by Canada in recent years, to include not only protection of civilians in military conflict but also protection of civilians from health threats.
Linking genomics, global health is not only a scientific and policy issue, but also a diplomatic one.
We collectively need to make a positive policy decision to capitalize on the potential of genomics/biotechnology to help reduce inequities in global health.
Ultimately, it will be necessary to crystallize the many lessons learnt in a format that is easily digestible.
The effort should bring together industry, academia, the press, NGOs, and government to alleviate suspicion, facilitate dialogue, build trust, arrive at consensus and agree on good practice guidelines.
This should harmonize the approach towards the application of genomics and biotechnology to solve major health problems worldwide.
An early indicator of success will be when the global discourse on biotechnology focuses on the benefits as well as the risks, and on the concerns of both the developing and developed world.
In the long run this may translate into a reduction in the avoidable burden of disease and better health indicators.
If we act, Botswana's life expectancy may one day be closer to 80 than to 30 after all.
The setting is a downtown restaurant to which the editor Tina Brown has invited Hillary Clinton and a handful of notables, including Caroline Kennedy, filmmaker Michael Moore, and former Senator George McGovern.
What is immediately striking is Clinton’s youthful appearance, bright laugh, and blue eyes that appear a little too round when she gazes at us with curiosity.
Sometimes her expression is briefly clouded by a streak of stifled pain, obstinate and not wholly contained.
Five years earlier, she was the most humiliated wife in America, a woman whose private life was thrown open – fully and relentlessly – to public scrutiny.
So she can talk national and international politics until she is blue in the face.
She can sing the praises of John Kerry, whom her party has just nominated in an effort to deny George W. Bush a second term.
And she can expound on her role as the junior senator from New York.
Still, there persists an idea that I cannot push out of my head, and that I enter into the travel journal that I am writing for The Atlantic.
The idea is this: to avenge her husband and to take revenge on him, to wash away the stain on the family and show what an unblemished Clinton administration might look like, this woman will sooner or later be a candidate for the presidency of the United States.
This idea brings to mind Philip Roth’s The Human Stain, published a year after the Senate acquitted her husband of perjury and obstruction-of-justice charges, with its searing portrait of how indelible even an undeserved blot on one’s reputation can be.
She will strive to enter the Oval Office – the theater of her inner, outer, and planetary misery – on her own terms.
And the most likely outcome, my article will conclude, is that she will succeed.
The senator from New York has become President Barack Obama’s secretary of state.
Her aura dominated the just-concluded G-8 summit hosted by France.
It is ten in the evening, and I am waiting at the elevators in the lobby of the Hotel Westin with Mahmoud Jibril, one of the leaders of the Libyan insurrection.
Jibril has made a special trip to plead on behalf of the civilians whom Colonel Muammar Qaddafi and his sons have promised to drown in rivers of blood.
“I thought you were in Libya!” she exclaims when she sees me.
“I’ve just returned,” I respond, gesturing toward Jibril.
That triggers one of those great bursts of laughter that, as I noticed in Boston, raise her high cheekbones still higher.
Then, suddenly serious, and accompanied by a man whom I notice for the first time and who turns out to be J. Christopher Stevens, the young US ambassador to Libya who will be murdered a little more than a year later, she leads Jibril to her suite for an interview.
When, after nearly an hour, Jibril reemerges, he is convinced that the conversation went badly.
He grumbles that Clinton hardly opened her mouth, which he interprets to mean that his plea was not well received.
In fact, Clinton was deeply moved by Jibril’s testimony, riveted by the horror of the regime’s tanks grinding toward Benghazi at that very moment.
In the hours that follow, she convinces Obama not to bow to his anti-interventionist secretary of defense, Robert Gates.
Her humanity and compassion are coupled with an acute sense of the iron discipline required for effective governance.
By February 2012, the war in Libya is over, and I am wrapping up my documentary film about the conflict.
I am in Washington, DC, in a wood-paneled conference room on the seventh floor of the Department of State’s headquarters, to gather Clinton’s recollections, as I had already done with French President Nicolas Sarkozy and British Prime Minister David Cameron.
This is the moment for conclusions and perspective, the always-fascinating moment when the actors in the drama, who have sometimes operated in secret, turn up their last cards.
She evokes her interview with Jibril, a conversation at the White House or the Elysée Palace.
She feels that, in acting as she did, she was faithful to her most cherished values and beliefs.
And she has no doubt that the West, in responding to the Arab League’s entreaty to intervene, avoided a replay of Srebrenica in North Africa.
What strikes me the most is that she sees, even then, the beginnings of the tribal conflicts and the coming contest among Islamists to outdo one another in fundamentalist purity.
She worries about the early violations of human rights, particularly women’s rights, which she fears will multiply.
She has no illusions that history turns out the way reason tells you it should.
Time is needed, she says, to build a state and construct a democracy – time and a mixture of pragmatism and faith, of patience and audacity, of respect for others and regard for oneself.
Was it her ideological contribution to an administration that, though she did not know it at the time, would continue without her?
One thing is certain: Of my three encounters with Hillary Clinton, this third was the one where I found her the strongest and most passionate, thoroughly imbued with the meaning and pitch of the great American pastoral.
If we meet again, I will not be surprised if I am addressing her as Madam President.
MEXICO CITY – As the saying goes: when the tide goes out, you find out who has been swimming without a bathing suit.
Few countries have emerged as naked from the receding waters of the global economic crisis as Mexico.
Saddled with an economic contraction of 8% of GDP, higher than any other Latin American country, Mexico is also slipping in the global competitiveness index, lags behind in key social indicators, is being downgraded by investment ratings agencies, and faces the prospect of declining oil revenues, owing to a dramatic drop in production.
According to recent official data, 50.1 million Mexicans – out of a total population of 104 million – live below the poverty line, and 17.5 million do not have enough money to eat.
So a country that has managed to produce Carlos Slim, reckoned to be the second wealthiest man in the world, produces millions of others who scrape by on two dollars a day.
Mexico has long considered itself the leader of Latin America, but Chile, Colombia, and the rising regional giant, Brazil, are increasingly leaving it behind.
Over the past 20 years, oil functioned as a type of life jacket for Mexico’s economy.
It hid economic distortions, allowing successive governments to postpone needed structural reform as it financed the status quo.
Mexico was able to float along, buoyed by billions of dollars of oil revenue, without having to swim more quickly or forcefully than its competitors in the sea of emerging markets.
But now that oil production at Pemex, the state owned oil monopoly, is plummeting, the country faces some hard truths that the oil bonanza obscured.
The government had become too dependent on a non-renewable resource, and therefore did little to deepen or widen the tax base.
Moreover, the manufacturing sector had become too dependent on US-driven export demand, and the population had become too dependent on remittances from emigrants working in the US.
The global financial crisis thus revealed the Mexican economy’s inability to innovate, promote investment, create jobs, or provide conditions for social mobility.
The fault does not lie exclusively in President Felipe Calderón’s timid counter-cyclical measures, or in the country’s social policy, or in the drop of manufacturing exports, or in the US financial crisis.
Over the past 20 years, the usual culprits seem to be low labor productivity, bad macroeconomic management, and divided governments that make legislative consensus almost impossible.
But the fundamental explanation lies in a crony capitalist system with too many vested interests to maintain.
Government after government has prioritized the preservation of corporatist loyalties over the promotion of economic growth and emphasized clientelist distribution over entrepreneurial innovation and creation of level economic playing field.
Mexico is trapped by a dense network of rent-seekers and monopolies in sectors that are crucial for economic growth, including telecommunications, energy, transportation, and financial services.
This network operates on the basis of political favors, collusion, regulatory capture, and the maintenance of privileges that the government offers in public-sector unions in return for political support.
Inequality, Interests and Competition , edited by the prominent economists Santiago Levy and Michael Walton, argues, vested interests are capable of blocking changes that would make the economy more productive and efficient.
There are too many unions, monopolists, and bureaucrats that behave like hungry sharks, accustomed to feeding off oil revenues and appropriating the extraordinary wealth that Mexico produces but does not share in an equitable and democratic way.
Regrettably, the promotion of economic growth has not been a priority for either the Calderón administration or that of his predecessor, Vicente Fox.
For too long, government officials have tinkered with Mexico’s economic structure through piecemeal reforms that seek to ensure political stability, but that do not address the key obstacles to greater innovation and competitiveness.
The results have become increasingly obvious and painful: an economy that has suffered more severely in the global crisis than its neighbors to the south; a rent-seeking business elite that is unaccustomed to competition; public and private monopolies that no one seems to have the political will to dismantle; and corporatist pacts that siphon off public resources to unproductive unions, thwarting productivity and growth.
What the current crisis has proved is that Mexico cannot continue to float, ignoring its nakedness.
It needs to rethink the fundamentals of an economy and political system in which entrenched interests have become “veto centers” for reform.
Otherwise, when the tide comes back in, Mexico will find itself struggling to survive in shark-infested waters.
LONDON – Governments worldwide are increasingly facing a fundamental question: how to deal with the causes of violent – often religiously motivated – extremism.
A former Al Qaeda member, for example, recently stated that the UK authorities’ failure to explain properly why it had not intervened in Syria’s civil war risked radicalizing more Muslims.
Although such ideas have received a somewhat mixed reception, they are a welcome sign of much-needed public debate.
Most people accept the need for security services to respond to terror, particularly in the aftermath of an attack.
Achieving lasting change, however, requires addressing not just the consequences of extremism but also its root causes.
For example, while endlessly worrying about the existence of dangerous material online, we could do more to educate our youth in the critical thinking skills needed to dismiss such content.
Before the digital revolution, young people met those from other countries and cultures in relatively restricted circumstances, such as on a holiday abroad or a school exchange program.
Today, however, they can interact with any number of people from anywhere in the world in a matter of seconds on their smart phones.
Many of these connections take place on un-moderated platforms that expose children to a wide variety of opinions, beliefs, and cultures – not all positive or safe.
Unfortunately, there are few sources of good advice to help young people navigate these dangers.
Most parents are barely able to keep up with the evolving technology, let alone oversee their children’s online conversations.
This means that it is up to our education systems to intervene early to help the connected generation interact safely in today’s digital world.
If we can teach children to recognize what they have in common with those from other cultures, we can also help them to resist the prejudices of those who seek to distort the truth and divide people.
The Tony Blair Faith Foundation’s schools program has made an important start in this respect.
It provides a moderated space in which 12-17 year olds worldwide can discuss challenging issues from a variety of perspectives, in a respectful and safe way.
Second, governments should support those groups that are already working on the ground and online to counter extremism.
In countries afflicted by religious conflict, such as Nigeria, this means helping religious leaders to develop strong inter-community relationships.
We know that when people of different religions work together for the good of the wider community, they come to understand one another in a way that helps them resist the call of extremists.
This type of sustained long-term work comes into its own when the worst happens.
For example, in response to attacks last year on a church in Peshawar, Pakistan, local Muslims formed human chains around churches, allowing them to hold services.
Such visible demonstrations of defiance in the face of violence strengthen ties between communities and can prevent the division that extremists try to generate.
The benefits of such inter-community spirit are evident in one of the world’s most diverse cities, London.
Last June’s arson attack on the Somali Bravanese Welfare Association’s center in the city’s Muswell Hill district (which followed the murder of British Army fusilier Lee Rigby by religious extremists) served only to unite its different communities.
London Citizens, a network of local civic institutions, organized Jewish assistance programs for Somali Muslims, including after-school events at Hendon School and Eden School.
Meanwhile, Finchley Reform Synagogue hosted a Ramadan festival, and Finchley United Synagogue hosted an Eid event.
These activities sent a powerful signal to extremists that their attempts to turn religious communities against each other had the opposite effect.
YouTube uses sophisticated technical procedures to ensure that the most inappropriate videos are swiftly taken down.
But this is only half the story: we also need to support and promote alternative, credible voices online to counter the extremist narrative.
Of course, this does not mean uploading videos of politicians in suits telling young men not to join the jihad in Syria.
Rather, it means identifying and backing those groups whose anti-extremist messages resonate with the intended audience.
Finally, in these tough economic times, we need to consider cost-effective ways to promote this work globally.
One future source of support for effective but under-resourced groups might be the recently established Global Fund for Community Engagement and Resilience, the first ever public-private global fund to support local, grass-roots efforts to counter extremism.
As the pace of globalization and technological change accelerates, extremists are finding ever more creative ways to spread their message.
BEIJING – Back in 2009, in the midst of the global recession, China’s government launched a massive economic-stimulus package that bolstered GDP growth by fueling a surge in bank lending.
But now it is becoming increasingly apparent to policymakers and investors that easy credit and lopsided policies have generated significant risk for China’s banking system.
Indeed, amid rising concern about banks’ troubled assets, defusing financial risk has become the authorities’ central goal.
According to the China Banking Regulatory Commission, commercial banks’ non-performing loans (NPLs) at the end of June totaled ¥539.5 billion ($88.1 billion) – nearly 1% of outstanding loans.
The loan loss reserve-fund balance was ¥1.5 trillion (up 19% from the previous quarter), the provision-coverage ratio was 292.5%, and the loan ratio was 2.8%.
Government-backed loans amounted to ¥9.7 trillion, representing a 6.2% increase since last quarter – nine percentage points lower than the average growth rate for all categories of banking loans.
And the balance of wealth-management products stood at ¥9.1 trillion, of which non-standard credit assets accounted for ¥2.8 trillion.
According to the official numbers, NPLs do not actually account for a very high share of total assets, and the NPL ratio (0.96%) is manageable.
The problem is that most of China’s NPLs are off-balance-sheet loans, so the NPL ratio may be much higher – and China’s financial sector much riskier – than anyone realizes.
In fact, many banks’ off-balance-sheet loans – often extended to higher-risk borrowers, like highly leveraged real-estate developers and local-government financing vehicles – now exceed newly issued balance-sheet loans.
If borrowers default on their off-balance-sheet loans, banks might choose to protect their reputations by covering the difference using internal funds, thereby transferring the risk onto their balance sheets and increasing the NPL ratio.
Banks’ exposure to local-government debt and the real-estate market has already undermined the quality of their assets, increasing debt pressure and weakening profitability.
Moreover, off-balance-sheet lending has helped to fuel over-investment in some sectors (especially infrastructure, iron and steel, energy, manufacturing, and real estate), leading to overcapacity and priming the economy for the emergence of bad-debt “disaster zones,” which would increase NPL ratios further.
Moves to liberalize interest rates will put even more pressure on asset quality and bank profitability.
According to China’s Academy of Social Sciences, the volume of banks’ troubled assets fell from nearly ¥2.2 trillion in 2000 to ¥433.6 billion in 2010, while liabilities formed from these dissolved assets grew from ¥1.4 trillion to ¥4.2 trillion.
Eliminating banking-sector risk will require decisive government action, including comprehensive financial reform and effective risk-management strategies for financial operations in core sectors.
But perhaps the biggest challenge will be determining which mechanisms will most efficiently address China’s troubled-asset problem.
China has historically approached broad-scale relief of troubled assets through three channels – capital injections, asset-management companies (AMCs), and the People’s Bank of China (PBOC) – all of which have serious downsides.
During the late-1990’s Asian financial crisis, China’s four major state-owned banks, which accounted for more than half of the country’s banking sector, had a capital-adequacy ratio of only 3.7% (compared to the international standard of 8%) and an NPL ratio of roughly 25%.
In order to recapitalize these banks, China’s government issued ¥270 billion of special treasury bonds in 1998, injecting all of the proceeds into the banks as equity – and, in the process, creating significant financial liabilities.
In 1999, the government decided that four newly established AMCs would purchase nearly ¥1.4 trillion in troubled assets from these banks, using a combination of PBOC loans and AMC bonds issued to the banks.
In order to mitigate the risk associated with these debt-funded loan purchases, the PBOC guaranteed the AMC bonds.
And, although it strengthened the banks’ balance sheets considerably, the AMCs had an average troubled-asset-recovery rate of slightly less than 25% in 2006, with actual losses close to ¥1 trillion.
China is, of course, not the only country that has struggled with troubled-asset relief.
Since the 2008 financial crisis, American financial institutions’ asset write-downs have amounted to 13% of GDP.
The Bush administration’s Troubled Asset Relief Program and the Obama administration’s financial rescue plan cost nearly $2.2 trillion, with the Federal Reserve purchasing a massive amount of banks’ assets.
In supporting financial-sector deleveraging, the Fed itself became highly leveraged, and troubled assets still plague its balance sheet.
Given the significant flaws in existing troubled-asset-relief channels, another option – securitization – is being discussed in China.
The PBOC already has called for banks to securitize their high-quality assets and sell the securities to interbank-market investors; that could be a prelude to troubled-asset securitization.
By selling troubled assets in the secondary market, commercial banks could strengthen their balance sheets while avoiding liability increases and enhancing asset liquidity.
But securitization creates its own challenges, such as how to price the assets.
Moreover, once a loan is securitized, the bank that issued it no longer has any incentive to ensure repayment by the borrower, which raises the risk of default and drives up interest rates.
Competitive securitization was a leading cause of the US subprime mortgage crisis; owing to defaults, mortgage loans remain America’s number one troubled asset.
In order to mollify investors in the face of increased default risk, China’s government might force commercial banks to strengthen their balance sheets through collateralization or to swap defaulted loans for new bonds, backed by China’s foreign reserves held in US Treasuries.
A better solution would be to develop the credit-rating market, establish a more comprehensive regulatory framework for the financial system, and create an effective mechanism for ring-fencing risk.
Such measures could offer the security and credibility needed to enable the successful securitization of troubled assets, paving the way for China’s leaders to deepen financial reform.
PRINCETON – At the recent meeting of G-20 finance ministers in Australia, US Treasury Secretary Jack Lew noted “philosophical differences with some of our friends in Europe,” before urging Europeans to do more to boost their anemic growth rate.
The terminology is striking, and underscores the difficulty of Europe’s search for a way out of its current malaise.
Canada’s finance minister, Joe Oliver, joined the call for fiscal expansion in Europe – a position for which there seems to be some support within the European Central Bank.
Indeed, ECB President Mario Draghi has advocated higher spending by more fiscally strong countries like Germany.
And ECB Executive Board member Benoit Coeure, together with his former colleague Jörg Asmussen, currently Germany’s deputy labor minister, recently suggested that Germany should “use its available room for maneuver to promote investments and reduce the tax burden of workers.”
In fact, most of the world believes that Germany should adopt a more expansive fiscal policy.
According to this view, austerity is counter-productive, because it induces slowdowns and recessions that make long-term fiscal consolidation more difficult.
But Germans – as well as some other Northern Europeans, and perhaps some Chinese economists – remain reticent.
They believe that responding to calls for stimulus would simply lead to more such calls, creating a log-rolling, pork-barrel dynamic in which any hope for fiscal consolidation is ruled out.
In the 1970s and 1980s, the United States regularly called on Germany and Japan to act as locomotives for the global economy.
But, until recently, the divergences were viewed in terms of interests, not “philosophies.”
Americans wanted additional demand for their goods and higher prices, while the Germans and Japanese defended their export industries.
The problem today, as Lew’s recent statement highlighted, stems from deeply entrenched differences between the opposing sides’ belief systems, with ideological questions about fairness and responsibility trumping pragmatic discussion of the best way forward for everyone.
As the historian Robert Kagan argued in 2002, Americans and Europeans do not only have different worldviews; they occupy entirely different worlds.
Just as Platonists and Aristotelians struggled against one another for millennia, Kantians and utilitarians have been at one another’s throats for centuries.
Such deep theoretical conflicts have real-world consequences, as they impede constructive debate and cooperative action in crisis situations.
Fundamental ideological divisions over the 2003 Iraq war have strained global politics for more than a decade.
Modern political processes and structures are simply not well suited for conducting – much less settling – philosophical disputes.
Democratic institutions are designed for making deals between competing interests, with parliaments specializing in finding the right combination of concessions to enable agreement on a generally accepted solution.
Likewise, international forums like the G-20 exist precisely to persuade a large number of vastly different countries to set aside philosophical questions for the sake of their shared economic, political, or security interests.
Philosophies do not just give a little here and there, blurring over the difficult bits in the hope that everything will work out in the end.
Imagine asking a Kantian to add just a bit of utilitarian calculation to the categorical imperative.
It was standard pre-modern practice to overcome such differences with a formal disputation.
In the early sixteenth century, the German princes attempted to settle the philosophical challenge presented by Protestant reformers by engaging Martin Luther to debate a prominent orthodox Catholic theologian, Johannes Eck.
There are not that many modern varieties of this sort of practice, but the 1944 United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference at Bretton Woods comes close.
By systemically engaging with the economic issues involved in building a viable international system, experts created a new global economic and political order.
In a sense, central banks have begun to resemble medieval philosophical faculties, with discussions addressing the issues underlying policy decisions, rather than just the policies themselves.
In the ECB, for example, a debate is underway to determine under which conditions deviation from fiscal orthodoxy might be stabilizing in the long term.
At a time when political processes are stalled on both sides of the Atlantic, the US Federal Reserve and the ECB have been engaging in a series of policy innovations, feeling their way toward a solution that could promote and sustain economic recovery.
On this basis, the ECB is recasting itself as the incubator of a new intellectual and philosophical synthesis.
But central banks’ new role as supreme arbiters of policy truth is fraught with hazard.
Given that the solutions that emerge from their disputations and analyses will be the product of technocratic – not democratic – processes, they are likely to trigger populist backlashes.
Moreover, the policy approaches that central banks produce may be too complex and interlinked to function efficiently.
In particular, the attempt to make expansionary policies conditional on the implementation of a host of microeconomic reforms is problematic.
If only some parts of a complex package linking fiscal leeway with structural reform are realized, the outcome is likely to disappoint – or even prove counterproductive.
Almost all of the world’s developed countries consider themselves, and are, social democracies: mixed economies with very large governments performing a wide array of welfare and social insurance functions, and removing large chunks of wealth and commodity distribution from the market.
Whatever it has been in the past, the US in the future will have to choose whether, and how much, it will be a social democracy.
Once upon a time, according to mythology at least, America had little downward mobility.
On the contrary, before the Civil War you could start out splitting rails, light out for the Western Territory, make a success of yourself on the frontier, and wind up as President – if you were named Abraham Lincoln.
In the generation after World War II, you could secure a blue-collar unionized manufacturing job or climb to the top of a white collar bureaucracy that offered job security, relatively high salaries, and long, stable career ladders.
Even in the first post-WWII generation, only a minority of Americans – a largely white, male minority – found well-paying stable jobs at large, unionized, capital-intensive manufacturing companies like GM, GE, or AT&T.
But if this story was half myth, it was also half true, particularly in the years after WWII.
Largely independent of education or family, those Americans who did value stability and security could grasp it in the form of jobs with “a future.”
Even for those not so lucky, economic risks were usually fairly low: the unemployment rate for married men during the 1960’s averaged 2.7%, and finding a new job was a relatively simple matter.
It was during this era – roughly from 1948 to 1973 – that sociologists found that a majority of Americans had come to define themselves not as working class, but as middle class.
The post-WWII period stands as a reference point in America’s collective memory, but it was in all likelihood an aberration.
In the early postwar decades, foreign competition exerted virtually no pressure on the economy, owing to the isolation of America’s continental market from the devastation of WWII.
At the same time, the war left enormous pent-up demand for the products of mass production: cars, washing machines, refrigerators, lawn mowers, television sets, and more.
Government policy back then began with a permanent military program of spending and R&D and continued through massive public works program and suburbanization, underpinned by the Federal Highway Program and subsidized home ownership loans from the Federal Housing Administration.
The regulatory institutions and behavioral norms that originated in the New Deal and developed during WWII came into full force: social security, a system of unionized labor relations, market regulation.
Favorable macroeconomic circumstances, the absence of foreign competition, a system of government support and regulation, and large-scale private provision of what in Europe would have been public social insurance all combined to give post-WWII America many of social democracy’s benefits without the costs.
Americans – at least white, male Americans – did not have to worry about tradeoffs between security and opportunity, because the US offered the advantages of both.
Corporate welfare capitalism substituted for what in Europe would have been government provided social democracy.
It had its cake and ate it, too: a combination of security with opportunity and entrepreneurship.
Private businesses are providing their workers with less and less in the form of defined-benefit pensions, health insurance, and other forms of insurance against life’s economic risks.
A government that cannot balance its own finances cannot be relied on to provide macroeconomic stability.
Indeed, former Chairman of the US Federal Reserve Paul Volcker sees the US as so macroeconomically vulnerable as to be running a 75% chance of a full-fledged dollar crisis over the next several years.
The political struggles that this generates will determine whether America will move more closely to the social democratic norm for developed countries, or find some way to accept and rationalize its existence as a country of high economic risk and deep divisions of income and wealth.
COPENHAGEN – At its heart, much of the debate over climate change deals with just one divisive and vexing question: How big should cuts in carbon emissions be?
Everybody wants to prevent global warming, and the real question is: How can we do that best?
We should be open to other ways to stop warming – such as cutting carbon emissions in the future instead of now, or focusing on reducing emissions of other greenhouse gases.
Cutting carbon emissions, however, requires a reduction in the basic energy use that underpins modern society, so it will also mean significant costs.
The prominent climate economist Professor Richard Tol of Hamburg University has analyzed the benefits and costs of cutting carbon now versus cutting it in the future.
Cutting early will cost $17.8 trillion, whereas cutting later will cost just $2 trillion.
Nonetheless, the reduction in CO2 concentration – and hence temperature – in 2100 will be greater from the future reductions.
Cutting emissions now is much more expensive, because there are few, expensive alternatives to fossil fuels.
Our money simply doesn’t buy as much as it will when green energy sources are more cost-efficient.
Tol strikingly shows that grand promises of drastic, immediate carbon cuts – reminiscent of the call for 80% reductions by mid-century that some politicians and lobbyists make – are an incredibly expensive way of doing very little good.
All the academic models show that, even if possible, limiting the increase in global temperature to 2oC, as promised by the European Union and the G-8, would cost a phenomenal 12.9% of GDP by the end of the century.
This would be the equivalent of imposing a cost of more than $4,000 on each inhabitant every year, by the end of the century.
Yet, the damage avoided would likely amount to only $700 per inhabitant.
The real cost of ambitious, early, and large carbon-cutting programs would be a reduction in growth – particularly damaging to the world’s poor – to the tune of around $40 trillion a year.
For every dollar that the world spends on this grand plan, the avoided climate damage would only be worth two cents.
It would be smarter to act cautiously by implementing a low carbon tax of about $0.5 per ton – about 0.5 US cent per gallon of gas or 0.1 euro-cent per litre of petrol – and increase it gradually through the century.
This would not cut carbon emissions spectacularly, but nor would it be a spectacular waste of public funds.
Each dollar would avoid $1.51 of global warming damages – a respectable outcome.
Taxing fossil fuels to reduce carbon emissions is a sensible part of the solution to climate change, but it is not the only or best way to prevent warming.
One of these is protecting forests, since deforestation accounts for 17% of emissions.
If we are actually serious about grand promises to keep global temperature rises below 2ºC, we obviously need to find ways of making this cheaper.
Professor Brent Sohngen of Ohio State University points out that forests could be important: including forestry in the control of greenhouse gases could somewhat reduce costs.
Moreover, although politicians focus nearly exclusively on cutting carbon emissions, CO2 is not the only gas causing warming.
And because methane is a much shorter-lived gas than CO2, we can prevent some of the worst of short-term warming through its mitigation.
Agricultural production accounts for half of anthropogenic methane, but wastewater systems, landfills, and coal mining also create the gas.
Professor Claudia Kemfert of the German Institute for Economic Research (DIW) argues that spending $14 billion to $30 billion to reduce methane would create benefits – from the reduction in warming – between 1.4 and three times higher.
We could also put a bigger focus on reducing black carbon, considered responsible for as much as 40% of current net warming and one-third of Arctic melting.
Black carbon is essentially the soot produced by diesel emissions, and – in developing countries – by the burning of organic matter to cook food and stay warm.
Sooty pollution from indoor fires claims several million lives each year, so reducing black carbon would be a life-saver.
A team of economists led by David Montgomery estimates that spending $359 million could realistically slash 19% of black carbon emissions.
This would have a significant cooling impact on the planet, and would save 200,000 lives from pollution.
The net annual benefits would run into several billion dollars, which equates to $3.60 worth of avoided climate damage for each dollar spent.
With this as our starting point, it is clear that a narrow focus on short-term carbon emission cuts is flawed.
The most pertinent question of all is: Why don’t we choose a solution to global warming that will actually work?
WASHINGTON, DC – America’s opening to China by Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger in 1971-1972 was a historic breakthrough.
Less famous, but of equal importance, was the next major step, taken by Jimmy Carter exactly 30 years ago, establishing full diplomatic relations between China and the United States.
Without this action, announced on December 15, 1978, US-China relations could not have moved beyond a small, high-level connection with a limited agenda.
As they left office in 1977, President Gerald Ford and Kissinger left behind an incomplete and therefore unstable relationship with China.
The US still recognized Taiwan, under the name of The Republic of China, as the legitimate and sole government of China.
Since 1972, America and China maintained small “liaison offices” in each other’s capitals, without recognition.
Official communications were very limited, and annual bilateral trade was under $1 billion.
Some saw this as a simple acknowledgement of reality, but in fact it was a momentous step that required diplomatic skill and political courage.
A way would have to be found for the US, while recognizing China, to continue dealing with the government on Taiwan without recognizing their claim to represent China; most important, the US had to retain the right to sell arms to Taiwan.
From a political point of view, there was the famed Taiwan lobby, one of the most powerful in the US, still dominated by the conservative wing of American politics.&
Led by America’s “Mr. Conservative,” Senator Barry Goldwater, and the leading contender for the 1980 Republican nomination, Ronald Reagan, the Taiwan lobby would fight normalization all the way.
(Goldwater took the US government to the Supreme Court to challenge, unsuccessfully, Carter’s action;
Reagan, in the 1980 presidential campaign, pledged partially to undo normalization, only to abandon that position after he was elected.)
The saga unfolded over the first two years of the Carter administration, entirely out of public view, except for two important trips to China, one by Secretary of State Cyrus Vance, the other by National Security Advisor Zbigniew Brzezinski.
Incredibly, those of us involved in the process (I was then Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs) managed to keep our intense negotiations completely secret. &
The Chinese demanded a complete severing of all official ties between Taiwan and the US, including arms sales.
Knowing that such a move would provoke an enormous backlash domestically, we looked for a formula for continuing official contacts and arms sales with Taiwan even after we had de-recognized them and terminated the mutual security treaty ratified during the Eisenhower years.
With advice from Eisenhower’s former Attorney General, Herbert Brownell, State Department lawyers drafted the Taiwan Relations Act, a law like no other in American history, which allowed the US government to conduct business with Taiwan, including arms sales, without recognition.
But when we explained to China why this was necessary in order to recognize them, they balked.
They wanted trade and other benefits of recognition, which would benefit both nations in those Cold War days, when China was fiercely hostile to the Soviet Union, with which it had almost gone to war only a few years earlier.
The breakthrough came in late 1978, and was carefully timed by Carter to follow the mid-term congressional elections.
The most important factor in the breakthrough was probably the emergence of Deng Xiaoping as China’s new paramount leader.
Deng, who had been forced to wear a dunce cap and denounce himself during the insanity of the Cultural Revolution, had achieved the greatest comeback imaginable, and in the fall of 1978, he finally got enough power to cut a deal with the US: China would not “agree” to American arms sales or other activities with Taiwan, but they would proceed with normalization anyway.
It was a classic example of Chinese negotiating style: firm on principle, flexible on specifics.
I am leaving a lot out here – this was a very complicated negotiation – but that was the essence of it.
In January 1979, Deng made his historic trip to the US, which began with a private dinner at Brzezinski’s house and climaxed with the most sought-after State dinner of the Carter years (also remarkable for Richard Nixon’s first visit to Washington since he had resigned;
I sat at Nixon’s table, and retain a menu that everyone signed that night).&
At Brzezinski’s house, Deng talked of his dreams for a China that he knew he would not live to see.
He believed China could leapfrog the lost years in which the world had passed it by, but only with American support.
He was ready to cooperate on containing the Soviet Union, even agreeing to the installation of secret American intelligence listening posts along China’s border to track Soviet missiles.
Deng accurately foresaw a vast exchange of students, modern technology, and trade.
More than any American official, he anticipated what the American opening to China would accomplish.
But even Deng could not fully imagine what would be unleashed by that announcement of December 15, 1978 – nothing less than the development of the most important bilateral relationship in the world today.
WASHINGTON, DC – The impact that groundbreaking technological advances like artificial intelligence will have on the functioning of our economies and labor markets has been a hot topic for a long time.
But Jerry Kaplan’s recent book Humans Need Not Apply: A Guide to Wealth and Work in the Age of Artificial Intelligence has impressed upon me the true size of the socioeconomic stakes.
One relatively well-known example of the digital revolution’s impact on the workings of markets is the ability to earn huge returns in high-speed trading by being a microsecond “ahead” of everyone else.
Another is the capacity for price discrimination by new electronic market makers like Uber, which thus appropriate every penny of the old “consumer surplus” of microeconomic theory.
Soon a new kind of enhanced Uber could emerge, integrating car, bus, ship, airplane travel, and hotel rooms into one super-app.
A key question is why good old competition does not whittle away these profits rapidly.
Companies borrow a lot to start up, accumulate large fixed costs, and offer such low prices at first that they lose money.
This enables them to expand their businesses virtually competition-free until they have established what is essentially a monopoly.
At that point, they can hike prices and engage in price discrimination relatively freely.
It first achieved massive scale, enabling it to store unordered products at diffuse locations and thereby reduce transport costs.
Add to that complex algorithms that set prices in a way that maximizes profits, and the company’s dominance seems relatively secure.
As this approach facilitates the rise of global super-firms, it creates serious problems for labor markets and societies, because it destroys mid-level jobs based on old skills faster than comparable jobs based on new skills can be created.
Equally serious, it contributes to shocking levels of income inequality, with a few households not only enjoying massive wealth, but also wielding considerable political influence.
If income becomes too concentrated too quickly, desired investment will tend to fall short of available savings, creating a Keynesian macroeconomic imbalance.
(Contrary to popular belief, what matters is not the actual amount of income flowing toward top earners, but the changes in that income.)
As it stands, the impact of these technological disruptions remains relatively small in the advanced countries.
But it could affect some 20% of GDP and 40% of jobs by 2030.
Though we are becoming accustomed to breaking records – in 2013, more than 90% of all data ever accumulated in human history had been accumulated in the previous two years – the reality is that the speed and scale of this transformation pose major challenges.
If we fail to address them adequately, the outcome is unlikely to be a safer and more prosperous society, but rather one in which frustration and hopelessness increase, potentially leading to extreme behaviors.
Companies with a future need for certain skills would become a kind of sponsor, involving potential future job offers, to a person willing to acquire those skills.
The worker could secure a loan against their projected future income to finance their studies.
If no job materialized, the individual would be held responsible for repaying only a fraction of the loan, with the balance absorbed by the company, which thus bears a share of the risk.
Other proposals focus on reforming legal frameworks to reflect more accurately new ways of working.
For example, those who are partly self-employed and partly employed by a third party would have to be better incorporated into social policies.
But none of these proposals reflects the scale of the transformation that we are confronting.
What we really need is fundamentally to transform the way our societies function – and fast.
France Stratégie, which advises the French government, and the American entrepreneur Nick Hanauer have proposed social-policy reforms that share a similar conceptual foundation.
Individuals earn “claims” over their lifetimes, first by being legal residents, and then by, say, obtaining educational degrees, earning professional certifications, performing community service (including military service), and making money.
These claims can be exchanged for various benefits, such as family leave, retraining, or supplementary retirement income.
The system would include all residents and be completely portable, with plenty of room for people to choose how and when to use their claims.
Complementary arrangements – with, say, potential employers offering additional credits for retraining – could also be implemented.
At the same time, governments must upgrade competition policy to protect against the emergence of global monopolies.
Here, new mega-regional trade deals, such as the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, should prove invaluable, provided that today’s powerful players are not permitted to dictate terms that advance only their interests.
International cooperation should also be strengthened to prevent multinationals from avoiding taxes by shifting profits among jurisdictions.
Tinkering with existing systems will not be enough to prepare us for the technology-driven transformation that we are facing.
We need a comprehensive strategy aimed at making markets – and politics – truly competitive, and ensuring that public policy works for the benefit of all.
WASHINGTON, DC – The world is now in the fourth year of the Great Recession.
So far, the economies belonging to the World Trade Organization have resisted the kind of widespread protectionism that would make a bad situation much worse.
But protectionist pressures are building as weary politicians hear more and more calls for economic nationalism.
A new WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement would benefit all by increasing developing countries’ capacity to trade, strengthening the WTO’s development mandate, and boosting global economic growth.
More than a decade after the launch of the Doha Round of global free-trade talks, this agreement could be a down payment on the commitment that WTO members have made to linking trade and development.
The right support would help traders in poorer countries to compete and integrate into global supply chains.
Inefficiencies in processing and clearing goods put traders in developing countries at a competitive disadvantage.
Outdated and inefficient border procedures and inadequate infrastructure often mean high transaction costs, long delays, opportunities for corruption, and an additional 10-15% in the cost of getting goods to market – even more in landlocked countries.
Research by the World Bank suggests that every dollar of assistance provided to support trade-facilitation reform in developing countries yields a return of up to $70 in economic benefits.
When funds are directed at improving border-management systems and procedures – the very issues covered by the trade-facilitation negotiations – the impact is particularly significant.
Projects aimed at boosting efficiency and transparency, supported by development banks and bilateral donors, have made a dramatic difference.
In East Africa, procedural improvements have reduced the average clearance time for cargo crossing the Kenya-Uganda border from almost two days to only seven hours.
In Cameroon, some of our organizations have worked with the World Customs Organization to help the customs authority reduce corruption and increase collection of revenues – estimated to be more than $25 million a year.
On the Laos-Vietnam border, a sub-regional cross-border transport agreement has cut cargo transit times from four hours to just over one hour.
A new customs component to a highway project between Phnom Penh and Ho Chi Minh City helped increase the total value of trade through the Moc Bai-Bavet border by 40% over three years.
In Peru, some of our banks have worked with international freight forwarders to connect remote villages and small businesses to export markets through national postal services, turning more than 300 small firms into exporters, most for the first time.
The outlines of a new WTO Trade Facilitation Agreement are already clear, but some technical differences remain on specific provisions.
Developing countries want a credible commitment to support implementation, such as technical assistance and capacity-building.
A World Bank study estimates that the costs of implementing the measures likely to be covered by a Trade Facilitation agreement would be relatively modest – $7-11 million in the countries studied, spread out over a number of years – especially when compared to the expected benefits.
Capacity-building and financing programs for governments that want to improve their trade facilitation are available already.
Major donor countries and international development organizations have put a priority on, and increased investment in, trade facilitation.
According to the OECD, from 2002 to 2010, trade facilitation-related assistance increased ten-fold in real terms, from almost $40 million to nearly $400 million.
The African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Islamic Development Bank, and the World Bank stand ready – alongside the WTO – to assist developing countries through the process of full and effective implementation of the agreement.
That means helping countries to assess their trade-facilitation needs on a case-by-case basis, match those needs with the resources required, and broker partnerships between recipient countries and development allies to ensure that support is provided quickly and efficiently.
In international negotiations, there is always a way forward if the benefits of an agreement are shared by all.
It is time for WTO members to make progress on issues where there is room to do so.
Judging by the ever-escalating trade war between the United States and China, the same is true of economic relationships.
While I published a book in 2014 on the codependent economic relationship between the US and China, I would be the first to concede that it is a stretch to generalize insights from human psychology to assess the behavior of national economies.
But the similarities are striking, and the prognosis all the more compelling, as the world’s two largest economies sink into a dangerous quagmire.
In its most basic terms, codependency occurs at one of the extremes of relationship dynamics – when two partners draw more from each other than from their own inner strength.
Codependency deepens as partner feedback tends to grow in importance and self-confidence steadily diminishes as a result.
Invariably, one partner hits a limit and seeks a new source of sustenance.
This leaves the other feeling scorned, steeped in denial and blame, and ultimately with a vindictive urge to lash out in response.
The case for US-China economic codependency has been compelling for many years.
On the brink of collapse in the late 1970s, following the cumulative convulsions of Mao’s Great Leap Forward and Cultural Revolution, China was quick to turn to the US for external support for Deng Xiaoping’s strategy of “reform and opening up.”
Meanwhile, the US, in the grips of stagflation in the late 1970s, was eager to seek new growth solutions; low-cost Chinese imports were the antidote for income-constrained American consumers.
The US also began to borrow freely from China’s vast reservoir of surplus saving – a convenient solution for the world’s largest deficit saver.
Born out of innocence, this two-way dependency blossomed into a seemingly blissful marriage of convenience.
Deep-seated biases and resentments – China’s so-called century of humiliation following the Opium Wars of the nineteenth century and America’s inability to get out of its own skin when assessing the ideological threat posed by a socialist state like China – sustained a long-simmering distrust that set the stage for the current conflict.
As the human pathology of codependency would predict, a parting of the ways eventually occurred.
China was the first to embrace change – committing to an economic rebalancing by shifting its growth model from external to internal demand, from exports and investment to private consumption.
China’s progress has been mixed, but the endgame is no longer in doubt, underscored by a shift from surplus saving to saving absorption.
After peaking at 52.3% in 2008, its gross domestic saving rate has fallen approximately seven percentage points and should continue to decline in the years ahead as China strengthens its long-porous social safety net, encouraging Chinese families to reduce fear-driven precautionary saving.
At the same time, an explosion of e-commerce in an increasingly digitized (that is, cashless) economy is providing a powerful platform for China’s emerging middle-class consumers.
And a transformation from imported to indigenous innovation is central to China’s long-term strategy, both to avoid the “middle-income trap” and to achieve great-power status by 2050, as per President Xi Jinping’s “new era” centenary aspirations.
Consistent with the human pathology of codependency, China’s shifts have become a source of growing discomfort for the US, which can hardly be thrilled with China’s saving pivot.
With America’s saving shortfall now worsening in the aftermath of last year’s poorly timed tax cuts, the US will only become more reliant on surplus savers like China to fill the void.
Moreover, while China’s nascent consumer-led growth dynamic is impressive by most standards, limited market access has constrained US companies from capturing what they judge to be a fair market share of the potential bonanza.
And, of course, there is enormous controversy over the innovation shift, which may well lie at the heart of the current tariff war.
Whatever the source, the conflict phase of codependency is now at hand.
China is changing, or at least attempting to do so, while America is not.
The US remains stuck in the time-worn mindset of a deficit saver with massive multilateral trade deficits and the need to draw freely on global surplus saving to support economic growth.
From the perspective of codependency, the US now feels scorned by its once compliant partner and, predictably, is lashing out in response.
Which brings us to the burning question: Will the US-China trade conflict end with a peaceful resolution or an acrimonious divorce?
Rather than react out of blame, scorn, and distrust, both countries need to focus on rebuilding their own economic strength from within.
That will require compromises on both sides – not just on the trade front, but also on the core economic strategies that both nations embrace.
The conflict phase of codependency frames it as a zero-sum battle: US allegations of Chinese intellectual property theft are portrayed by the Trump administration as nothing less than an existential threat to America’s economic future.
Yet, seen as a classic symptom of codependency, those fears are overblown.
Innovation is indeed the lifeblood of any country’s sustained prosperity.
China needs to shift from imported to indigenous innovation to avoid the middle-income trap – a key stumbling block for most developing economies.
The US needs to refocus on innovation to overcome yet another worrisome productivity slowdown that could lead to a corrosive stagnation.
That may well be the bottom line on the trade conflicts of codependency.
The US and China both need innovation-led economies for their own purposes – in codependency terms, for their own personal growth.
Transforming a zero-sum conflict of codependency into a positive-sum relationship of mutually beneficial interdependence is the only way to end this economic war before it turns into something far worse.
CAMBRIDGE – The West is ensnared in a debt crisis.
The United States, as everyone knows, came perilously close to defaulting on August 2, and Standard & Poor’s downgraded US debt from AAA on August 5.
In Europe, the outgoing head of the European Central Bank recommends more centralized fiscal authority in Europe in order to deal with likely defaults by one or more of Greece, Portugal, and Spain.
Both Europe and America can learn a lesson hidden in American history, for, lost in the haze of patriotic veneration of America’s founders is the fact that they created a new country during – and largely because of – a crippling debt crisis.
Today’s crises, one hopes, could be turned into a similar moment of political creativity.
After independence from Britain in 1783, America’s states refused to repay their Revolutionary War debts.
The country as a whole operated as a loose confederation that, like the European Union today, lacked taxing and other authority.
It could not solve its financial problems, and eventually those problems – largely recurring defaults – catalyzed the 1787 Philadelphia convention to create a new United States.
And then, in 1790-1791, Alexander Hamilton, America’s first treasury secretary, resolved the crisis in one of history’s nation-building successes.
Hamilton turned America’s financial wreckage of the 1780’s into prosperity and political coherence in the 1790’s.
To understand Hamilton’s achievement – and thus to appreciate its significance for our own times – we need to understand the scale of the Revolutionary War debt crisis.
Others tried to pay but would not levy the taxes needed to do so.
Others, like Massachusetts, tried to levy taxes, but its citizens refused to pay them.
Indebted farmers physically disabled the repayment machinery in many states, most famously in Shay’s Rebellion in Massachusetts.
James Madison, who would become the Constitution’s principal author, couldn’t borrow to buy land in frontier Virginia, because lenders lacked confidence that Virginia courts could enforce repayment.
He found Shays Rebellion so worrisome that he came out of his first retirement to preside over the 1787 convention.
Today, the US Constitution’s most noted features are its allocation of power between Congress and the presidency, and its guarantee of individual rights via its first ten amendments.
But, at the time, its key role was as a government-debt-repayment mechanism.
The Constitution would create a new national government that could coin stable money, borrow, and repay debts, including the states’ defaulted Revolutionary War borrowings.
With the Constitution ratified by 1789, Washington became President and appointed Hamilton – still in his thirties – to head the Treasury.
He was Washington’s Chief of Staff during the Revolutionary War and a quick study: when it was time to learn battlefield tactics, he read military manuals; when it was time to become a national leader who understood finance, he read finance books.
Yet, it was no accident that two military men were key to making the US a “respectable nation” in financial terms.
Both thought that only a fiscally strong US could have the military prowess needed to defend itself from the European powers, whose return to American soil both men expected.
There were no entitlements to cut or government funds to re-direct.
Hamilton knew that the wrong kind of taxes would weaken the already-fragile economy.
And Hamilton needed Congress to approve the federal government’s assumption of the states’ debts, which at first seemed unlikely.
Some states, like Virginia, had already paid much of their debt, and others saw their debt as having become a financial game for New York speculators.
As a result, many states feared federal assumption would mean that their taxes would go to pay northern speculators or to retire the debt of big borrowers, like Massachusetts.
Virginia and several other southern states that owed little or had repaid what they owed voted against Hamilton’s first assumption bill and defeated it.
They were expected to be adamant – an outcome that could well have brought about the young country’s demise.
Jefferson and Madison, the southern leaders, opposed Hamilton’s assumption plan, and Madison was critical in blocking it in Congress.
Jefferson and Madison did not want the country’s capital to be in the north, and Hamilton reluctantly agreed to support moving it to an area carved out of Virginia or Maryland.
They, in turn, would secure the votes for the federal government to assume and repay the states’ defaulted debts.
Despite the enormous cost – more than half of the fledgling government’s expenditures in early years went to debt service – the economy shook off the 1780’s depression and entered a growth boom.
It was easier, because there were few choices: no income-tax rates to adjust or entitlements to cut.
And it was harder, because the US was an unknown entity, and there was little reason for confidence in the American non-nation.
Today’s trajectory is the reverse of that of the 1780’s and 1790’s.
It is hard today for America (and, until recently, the world) to imagine a US default, because there has been no strong reason to fear one since the 1790’s.
Americans today know what must be done: some combination of entitlement cuts and tax increases.
But, until Europe and the US find leaders with the authority and willingness to repeat a modern version of the deal-making example set by Hamilton, Jefferson, and Madison 200 years ago, their debt problems will continue to weaken their national foundations.
NEW YORK – The 17th conference of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, popularly known as COP-17, is taking place in Durban, South Africa, at a critical moment, as the historic 1997 Kyoto Protocol is set to expire next year.
But, like the climate-change conferences in Copenhagen in 2009 and in Cancún in 2010, COP-17 can be expected to spend much and produce little.
Indeed, the extravagance of these conferences seems to grow, rather than shrink, as their dismal results become more apparent.
COP-15 in Copenhagen lasted 12 days, and is estimated to have attracted 15,000 delegates and 5,000 journalists.
The carbon emissions created by so many people flying to Denmark was real, while the emissions targets that the conference sought remained beyond reach.
That will be true in Durban as well – and on an even greater scale.
The real problem is that the expectations concerning meaningful action on climate change, as opposed to gimmicks such as US President Barack Obama’s last-minute arrival and minuscule gestures in Copenhagen, are now lower than ever.
First, the United States under Obama’s ineffective leadership has drifted yet further into a “What’s in it for me?” attitude on key issues requiring international action.
In place of what the economist Charles Kindleberger once called an “altruistic hegemon,” the America that the world now faces is what I call a “selfish hegemon.”
Thus, the US has virtually pulled out of the Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations, with Obama acquiescing to greedy business lobbies that will not settle unless more of their demands are met.
But not only has Obama abandoned Doha; he has also seriously endangered the multilateral trading system by diverting US efforts and resources to discriminatory bilateral trade deals and, most recently, to the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which will principally aid countries that are worried about an aggressive China and seek political security rather than increased trade.
The same is true of environmental action: after Australia’s belated ratification of the Kyoto Protocol in 2007, the US remains the only country that has not ratified the agreement.
The second problem is that the sheer weight of the US in international affairs, though diminished nowadays, has nonetheless led to a corruption of the principles that should underpin a new climate-change treaty to succeed the Kyoto Protocol.
For example, unlike the World Trade Organization, whose dispute-settlement mechanism imposes penalties for abandoning negotiated reductions of trade barriers, the targets for emission reductions are not binding and enforceable commitments.
The US has not agreed to accept such sanctions for failing to meet emissions targets; but, without penalties, the exercise is largely futile and only encourages cynicism about the effort to combat climate change.
Moreover, abandoning the Kyoto Protocol’s exemption of developing countries from obligations for current emissions, the US has insisted on obligations from China and India that reflect a common form of “taxation” of emissions.
But there are persuasive reasons why these countries insist that the obligations must instead reflect per capita emissions, a criterion that would require far greater emission cuts by the US than its leaders now contemplate.
Besides, these countries correctly argue that the tradeoff between action on climate change and poverty reduction is more compelling for them at their level of per capita income, unless they can access newly emerging technologies at low cost.
This demand suggests that the US should subsidize the flow of technology to India and China from US firms holding patents, which is highly impractical.
That is where the $100 billion Global Climate Change Fund, promised at the Cancún COP-16 conference, comes in.
Unfortunately, even environmental icons like Al Gore in the US are so heavily invested in new green technology that their self-interest is tied up in this fund being spent on developing privately owned new technologies that are protected by patents.
The new “Green Revolution” seeds that the Nobel laureate agronomist Norman Borlaug developed with public money were freely available to all users anywhere.
The technology developed by the money spent from the Global Climate Change Fund also should be equally available to all, including India and China, which would then enable them to agree to more emissions cuts.
Indeed, even the contributions to the Fund should have reflected the past damage by the developed countries over the course of a century of carbon emissions – an obligation based on the well-established tort principle that the US has accepted for domestic pollution.
Several such sensible ways to design the Kyoto Protocol’s successor treaty have been undermined by efforts to accommodate inappropriate US-led demands and objections, resulting in the impasse that became evident at the COP conferences in Copenhagen and Cancún.
Those who do not believe in magic know better than to hope that it will somehow disappear in Durban.
DENVER – Much has been said about the similarities between the chaos in Syria and the Balkan wars of the 1990’s.
But, while the prolonged killing may indeed be reminiscent, the political and diplomatic effort that finally ended the war in Bosnia is hardly in evidence today.
To date, there has been nothing similar to the Contact Group plan that was hammered out in the summer of 1994 by representatives from Britain, France, Germany, Russia, and the United States, and implemented the following year in Dayton, Ohio, after months of on-the-scene diplomacy.
In Syria, the only diplomatic process is in the hands of the courageous, if beleaguered, former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan, who has understood – better than many analysts of this latest international outrage – that any lasting political settlement must not be a triumph of one side or the other.
No one can watch the ongoing violence in Syria without a sense of horror at the armed attacks on largely unarmed civilians, overwhelmingly by groups that support President Bashar al-Assad’s regime.
But those who say that Syria is on the brink of civil war miss what has become more obvious with each passing day: Syria alreadyis in a state of civil war, one whose battle lines were drawn months ago.
On one side is Assad’s minority Alawite tribe, which over the years has attracted secular Sunnis to share in the spoils of a one-party, authoritarian state.
But Assad’s coalition is broader than that, which helps to explain how he has been able to hold on to power while other regimes in the region have not.
Syria’s Christians, many of its 1.5 million Kurds, and even Damascus-based, secular classes have been disinclined to join what is widely perceived in the country – though not by the rest of the world – as a sectarian Sunni opposition that might not be supportive of cultural pluralism were it to assume power.
In the past, characterizing as a civil war a conflict in a complex region was a tacit warning that others should stay out.
But the civil war in Syria has much broader ramifications, which could lead to a wider regional conflict.
Given this looming threat, it is becoming increasingly clear that staying out of the Syrian mess may not be an acceptable choice for countries that have an interest in a calmer and more democratic Middle East.
Ominously, the conflict looks increasingly like a proxy war between Iran and the Sunni Arab states, which regard their own minority Shia populations as a potential Iranian fifth column.
Iran has sought to maintain its influence in the Levant (including in Lebanon and among some Palestinian groups) by providing material support to Assad.
By contrast, many Sunni Arab states have provided varying degrees of support to the largely Sunni opposition, a hodgepodge of groups that include the Muslim Brotherhood and other sectarian forces similar to Egypt’s ultra-conservative Salafis.
Russia and China, bruised by their loss of face in the NATO-led intervention in Libya in 2011, have sought to keep the international community out of Syria.
Both countries fear that intervention – whether militarily or through economic sanctions – could harm their interests in Syria, where they – especially the Russians – have been the dominant external players.
In the absence of concerted international action, the US and Europe have largely weighed in with vocal condemnation of the party committing the overwhelming number of human-rights violations: Assad and his henchmen.
They have also highlighted the loss of life in an effort to shame Russia into adopting a more amenable position.
But denouncing Assad or Russia is unlikely to produce any effect except to assure domestic audiences that the West is on the side of the angels in the conflict.
Likewise, proclaimed support for disparate, barely-known rebel groups; demands for dead-on-arrival sanctions resolutions; feckless calls for Assad’s departure (as if he plans to take the advice); and half-baked ideas about enforced “safe areas” (an utter failure in Bosnia) are unlikely to spare many lives, much less bring about the endgame that is so desperately needed.
What is really needed are serious and sustained negotiations among interested international powers (let’s call them a “contact group”) on a viable political outcome.
A “Contact Group Plan” should be carefully worked out with Annan and his team (the only entity at this point that seems to have access to all sides).
Most importantly, all of the plan’s stakeholders then need to support Annan, publicly and privately.
Publicly declaring support for Annan’s ceasefire plan, and then whispering to journalists that it is “in tatters,” as has occurred repeatedly in recent weeks, will not get the job done.
Clearly, a new way forward is needed, and a good start would be a political/diplomatic plan that Annan could sell to the parties.
In the Balkans, it was a US team that finally sold the Contact Group Plan to the parties directly involved.
We succeeded because we had tremendous support from every country that wanted to see the horrific conflict in Bosnia brought to an end.
The same unqualified support is what Annan – the best diplomat we have out there – needs and deserves.
CAMBRIDGE – Since the United States’ Affordable Care Act (ACA) – or “Obamacare” – was enacted in 2010, Republicans have been promising to “repeal and replace” it.
When the 2016 presidential and congressional elections delivered all three branches of the US government to the party, the time to fulfill that promise seemed to have arrived.
Yet the anti-Obamacare crusade has just been dealt a crushing blow, owing to the refusal of some Republican senators to vote for the replacement legislation.
But why should the Democrats help to dismantle their biggest legislative achievement of the last decade (if not longer)?
The major flaws in Obamacare are not, as has been argued, unintended consequences of a poorly designed policy, which thus must be replaced; instead, they stem from Republican demands.
In any case, Republicans have majorities in both houses of Congress, so they don’t actually need the Democrats’ support to pass legislation.
Likewise, President Donald Trump’s unprecedented lack of experience and general incompetence cannot be at fault, as he isn’t indispensible to the repeal and replace process.
Those votes may have been merely symbolic, given Obama’s veto power; nonetheless, the striking fact remains that the Republicans never bothered to try to formulate an alternative in the event that one of their own would one day become president.
In fact, they couldn’t formulate a workable alternative to Obamacare, because some within their ranks refuse to accept the basic laws of arithmetic.
According to the estimates produced by the Congressional Budget Office, which has a very good track record, the Republicans’ proposed health-care legislation would have caused more than 20 million Americans to lose insurance coverage.
But many Republicans continue to insist that they can somehow slash spending and eliminate rules and requirements, including the “individual mandate” (the requirement that all Americans have health insurance) that underpins Obamacare, without affecting current coverage levels.
Some support repeal and replace anyway: Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, for example, is a relatively consistent libertarian who believes that the benefits of minimizing the government’s role in health care somehow outweigh the costs to lower- and middle-income working Americans.
Others recognize that the costs are unacceptable – indeed, that is why the Republican-proposed replacement has just been rejected – but have been unable to put forward any credible alternative.
Logically, there should be a third group of moderate Republicans who acknowledge the arithmetic, find it unacceptable, and commit either to reforming Obamacare or developing some other realistic plan that can deliver better health insurance to more Americans.
Unfortunately, there is nobody left in this category, except perhaps Senator Susan Collins of Maine.
But there is another, deeper reason why the Republicans cannot come up with an alternative to Obamacare: the ACA is based firmly on their own ideas.
For example, the individual mandate that they now decry was originally developed by conservative think tanks seeking to devise a workable system of national health insurance with the smallest possible role for the government.
It was the centerpiece of Massachusetts’ health-care reform signed by Mitt Romney in 2006, when he was the state’s governor.
The individual mandate is essential to barring insurance companies from discriminating against those with pre-existing conditions – a provision that even Obamacare’s opponents want to keep.
It is not financially feasible for private insurance companies to insure people who are already sick or at high risk, if those who are still healthy are not also in the pool.
This does not mean that the US needs to go to the extreme of a full-on socialized health-care system, whereby the government directly provides health care to all (though the British are certainly attached to their National Health Service).
What some – most vocally, Vermont Senator Bernie Sanders – have proposed is a single-payer system.
In Canada, such a system of government insurance and private provision of services delivers strong health outcomes at a fraction of the cost of the US system.
Yet, while a substantial share of Americans may support such a system, a single-payer program would face strong resistance from three powerful groups: the insurance industry, consumers who are happy with their current employer-paid plans, and Republicans in general.
But the system many Republicans tout – a scheme based fully on “personal responsibility” – is not feasible.
The system the US had before Obamacare did not meet that standard, as the uninsured imposed costs not just on themselves, but also on other Americans.
Those without insurance are more likely to experience conditions like obesity and addiction, and to let their health deteriorate before seeking medical attention.
Before Obamacare, hospitals would simply pass the higher costs of treating them on to other patients.
A system of genuine personal responsibility would require that the medical profession not provide care that it feels ethically obliged to provide.
But I have yet to meet a free-market conservative who would truly favor a new federal law requiring ambulances to leave accident victims by the side of the road unless they can show proof of insurance.
The solution to America’s health-care woes lies somewhere between socialized medicine and laissez-faire.
But there is no question that it must include something like the three legs of the Obamacare “stool”: the individual mandate, protection for those with pre-existing conditions, and a means to pay for it all.
Though some Republicans pretend otherwise, there is simply no solution that decreases the role of government without increasing the ranks of the uninsured – and thus raising total health-care costs.
EDINBURGH – People with higher intelligence test scores in childhood and early adulthood tend to live longer.
This result has been found among people from Australia, Denmark, England and Wales, Scotland, Sweden, and the United States.
Indeed, the impact of intelligence on mortality rivals well-known risk factors for illness and death, such as high blood pressure, being overweight, high blood glucose, and high cholesterol.
An intelligence test score in early life is partly a record of what the environment has wrought on the brain and the rest of the body up to that time.
Babies who have lower birth weights, for example, are more prone to chronic illnesses later in life.
But tests of whether birth weight might explain some of the link between intelligence and mortality have found no connection.
Parents’ occupations are also related to their child’s intelligence and later risk of illness: children from more privileged backgrounds tend to have higher intelligence and better health, and to live longer.
However, there is no convincing evidence that parental background explains the link between higher intelligence and longer life.
Other researchers have viewed intelligence test scores as possibly more than just an indicator of an efficient brain.
After all, the brain is just one organ of the body, so people whose brains work well in early life may also have other organs and systems that are more efficient than others’.
The best we have done to date has been to examine whether people’s reaction speeds are related to intelligence and to mortality.
Reaction-time tests involve little thinking, and merely ask people to respond as fast as they can to simple stimuli.
People who react faster have, on average, higher intelligence scores and live longer.
But we need to think of better measures of the body’s integrity to test this idea more fully.
Every day, as we live our lives, we make decisions about our health: what, when, and how much to eat; how much exercise to take; how to look after ourselves if we have an illness; and so forth.
Therefore, the reason that intelligence and death are linked might be that people with higher intelligence in childhood make better decisions about health, and have healthier behaviors.
As adults, they tend to have better diets, exercise more, gain less weight, have fewer hangovers, and so on.
There have not been any studies with data on childhood intelligence, lots of subsequent data on adult health behaviors, and then a long-term follow-up for deaths.
And only such a study could tell us whether it is these healthy behaviors that explain the link between intelligence and death.
A fourth type of explanation is that people with higher intelligence in childhood tend to attain better educational qualifications, work in more professional jobs, have higher incomes, and live in more affluent areas.
So, perhaps that’s it: higher intelligence buys people into safer and more health-friendly environments.
Certainly, in some studies, social class in adulthood seems to explain a lot of the link between intelligence and death.
We are still not sure whether, say, education and occupation “explain” the effect of intelligence on health, or whether they are, in effect, merely surrogate measures of intelligence.
Researchers have also searched for clues about the intelligence-mortality link in specific types of death.
Lower intelligence in early life is associated with a greater likelihood of dying from, for example, cardiovascular disease, accidents, suicide, and homicide.
As we have come across these specific findings, we have realized that each link might need a different explanation.
Finally, we know that how intelligent we are and how long we shall live are caused by both environmental and genetic influences.
There are experimental designs, using twins, that can find out the extent to which intelligence and mortality are linked because they share environmental and genetic influences.
Among the most informative exercises we can undertake in cognitive epidemiology is to obtain a large group of twins on whom there is data on early-life intelligence and who were tracked for a long time to find out who had died.
We haven’t yet come across a large enough group of twins with such data.
The ultimate aim of this research is to find out what intelligent people have and do that enables them to live longer.
Once we know that, we will be able to share and apply that knowledge with the aim of achieving optimal health for all.
MADRID – With three nominees now in the running to become the World Bank’s next president – Nigerian Finance Minister Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, former Colombian Finance Minister José Antonio Ocampo, and the United States’ nominee, Dartmouth College President Jim Yong Kim – this is the moment to step back and assess the Bank’s trajectory.
Unless the Bank’s next president has a clear vision of the way ahead, and the gravitas to withstand the institution’s internal pressures, he or she will be swallowed up by its complex machinery and unwieldy processes.
Global attention has been focused on weighing the three candidates’ strengths and qualifications, particularly their economic and financial credentials.
But the real challenge lies in providing direction for the World Bank that reflects the world as it is, and re-calibrating the Bank’s tools accordingly.
Inevitably, the new course hinges in part on recognizing that economics and finance, while integral elements of all areas of the Bank’s activities, are no longer the institution’s main drivers.
The World Bank’s traditional instruments have been (and still are) low-interest loans, interest-free credits, and grants.
But the Bank’s core philosophy has rested on lending, with interest, to middle-income countries and channeling the ensuing funds to the poorest countries eligible for assistance.
Today, owing to the conditionality of its loans, the Bank is losing competitiveness vis-à-vis the plethora of actors, both public and private, that crowd the development scene.
Meanwhile, the Bank is emerging as a vital – indeed, indispensable – source of expertise and technical assistance, as well as a provider of global public goods.
Building on these strengths, the Bank must be willing to understand its client countries’ realities, rather than pontificate, and to balance its country-based work with its global roles.
While lending is progressively thinned out and retained only for the poorest countries, the Bank must adopt the lean hub-and-spoke structure of a strategic consultancy or a “knowledge bank.”
The organization must reformulate its mission, moving away from the idea of being the “West’s Bank,” the “BRICS’ Bank,” or, for that matter, a bank at all.
What is unambiguous today is a growing intolerance for bad governance and corruption – a collective rejection evident in countries as diverse as Burma, Congo, Russia, and Bolivia, not to mention Arab countries from Syria to Morocco.
At the same time, the biggest threat to the international order comes from failing, failed, post-conflict, and conflict-ridden states.
For the past two decades, as part of the soul-searching triggered by the collapse of communism, the World Bank has been seeking to make governance and anti-corruption efforts integral to its work on economic growth and poverty reduction in the developing world.
But, beyond eloquent rhetoric, these changes have been incremental, and have been superimposed on the Bank’s operations, rather than becoming part of its organizational DNA.
The Bank has been too focused on itself and its reputation, and not enough on the countries that it advises and in which it operates, while institution-building has been considered to be embedded in the growth agenda.
As a consequence, law, which constitutes the foundation of institution-building, has been regarded as no more than a toolbox.
Property rights, contract enforcement, entrepreneurial conditions, and free and competitive product and labor markets were proclaimed to be part of the economic framework – a misconception recently restated by the former World Bank economist and current development pundit William Easterly.
Moreover, the traditional interpretation of the Bank’s Articles of Agreement imposed a proclaimed “neutrality” that translated into a readiness to overlook the nature of its client countries’ regimes and their lack of popular accountability.
Ironically, the same World Bank whose former president, Robert McNamara, transformed it almost five decades ago, at the height of decolonization, into a key instrument in the fight against communism, today views the so-called “Beijing Consensus,” by which the Chinese Communist Party maintains an iron grip on the country, as a viable development model.
It must enhance support for the private sector and prioritize infrastructure, in a broad sense, in accordance with its importance for individual initiative.
It also must strengthen its know-how in capacity-building, particularly administrative capacity-building, with an emphasis on its legal-institutional aspects.
Finally, it must place anti-corruption and good-governance programs at the core of its mission.
The international community cannot afford a World Bank that, anchored in the world of the past, loses its relevance.
No other institution can fulfill the Bank’s formidable potential as a center of knowledge and a coordinator of development policies.
The mandate of the Bank’s next president will be crucial in making or breaking an institution that the world desperately needs in the century ahead.
MONTREAL – There is widespread agreement on two facts about the Chinese economy.
Car sales were up nearly 10% in March over the same month in 2015.
And retail spending grew at an annual clip of 10% in the first quarter.
Industrial investment, especially by state-owned enterprises, has been rallying strongly.
At the root of this turnaround is enormous credit growth, as the authorities, concerned that the earlier slowdown was excessive, encourage China’s banks to lend.
Credit growth, known in China as “total social financing,” grew at an annual rate of 13% in the fourth quarter of 2015 and again in the first quarter of this year – that is, double the rate of annual GDP growth.
Since the financial crisis erupted in September 2008, China has had the fastest credit growth of any country in the world.
Indeed, it is hard to point to another credit boom of this magnitude in recorded history.
The bad news is that credit booms rarely end well, as the economists Moritz Schularick and Alan Taylor have reminded us.
China’s credit tsunami is financing investment in steel and property, sectors already burdened by massive excess capacity.
The companies doing the borrowing, in other words, are precisely those least capable of repaying.
The International Monetary Fund, which tends to adopt a conservative posture on such matters (not least to avoid antagonizing powerful governments), estimates that 15% of Chinese loans to nonfinancial corporations are at risk.
With nonfinancial corporations’ debt currently standing at 150% of GDP, the book value of the bad loans could be a quarter of national income.
It still may be possible to sell off vacant apartments for a fraction of their construction cost.
It may be possible to sell off rolling mill machinery to other countries, or as scrap.
But where the loans at risk are concentrated – in steel, mining, and real estate – suggests that losses will be substantial.
This is why the supposedly painless solution, debt-for-equity swaps, will not be painless.
Yes, bad loans can be purchased by asset-management companies, which can package them up and sell them off to other investors.
But if the asset managers pay full book value for those loans, they will incur losses, and the government will have to foot the bill.
If they pay only market value, it will be the banks that incur losses, and the government will have to repair their balance sheets.
First, the authorities can issue bonds to raise the funding needed to recapitalize the banks.
In doing so, they would effectively transform the corporate debt problem into a public debt problem.
This would place the financial burden squarely on the shoulders of future taxpayers, which would not enhance consumer confidence.
Public debt in China is still relatively low; but, as any citizen of Ireland can tell you, it can balloon when banking crises strike.
But, while the authorities relied on this approach in 1999, the last time they were faced with a serious bad-loan problem, running the money printing press is not compatible with officials’ other stated goal: a stable exchange rate.
We saw last August how investors can panic when the renminbi exchange rate moves unexpectedly.
Currency depreciation may not only precipitate a destabilizing spiral of capital flight; it could also destabilize the banks, from which money leaving the country must first be withdrawn.
The final option is to imagine that the bad-loan problem will solve itself.
The banks would be encouraged to “evergreen” their loans: to roll them over when repayment falls due.
Borrowers that need to be liquidated or reorganized will instead stay alive, thanks to the drip-feed of bank finance.
The result will look familiar to aficionados of Japan’s banking crisis: zombie banks lending to zombie firms, which apply artificial pressure on viable firms, stifling their growth.
Financing bank recapitalization through bond issuance is probably the least bad option.
TOKYO – North Korea’s communist regime is, by most accounts, set to complete its second dynastic transfer of power, this time from Kim Jong-il, who has ruled since 1994, to his youngest son, Kim Jong-eun.
The general assembly of North Korea’s Workers’ Party, now underway for the first time in 44 years, is the clearest sign yet that “Dear Leader” Kim, who is seriously ill, is passing the crown in the hermit kingdom founded by his father, Kim Il-sung.
One reason why a dynastic succession is taking place is that Kim Il-sung created a national ideology, Juche, which mixes communism and autarky with a heavy dose of Confucian values.
Confucianism exalts an idealized bond between father and son as the model for all human relations, including between ruler and ruled.
So, just as a Confucian son’s absolute duty is to revere his father, the absolute duty of a Confucian subject is to revere the ruler.
Moreover, Kim Jong-il, like his father, has consistently appointed members of his family to positions of power.
Indeed, Kim Jong-eun, the third son of Kim Jong-il and his late consort Ko Young-hee, was mooted as his father’s successor almost a year ago.
North Korean propagandists proclaim Kim Jong-eun “the Young General,” but whether he will exercise the same absolutist authority as his father is an open question.
Not only is he young and inexperienced, but his aunt, Kim Kyong-hui, Kim Jong-il’s sister and the wife of the second-ranking figure in North Korea’s hierarchy, Chang Song-taek, may balk at power slipping through her fingers.
Although rarely seen or heard, Kim Kyong-hui, born on May 30, 1946 to Kim Il-sung and his first wife Kim Jong-suk, has served in a range of key Workers’ Party positions, including deputy director of the International Department and director of the Light Industry Department.
She became a member of the all-powerful Central Committee in 1988 – a post she retains to this day.
After her father, Kim Il-sung, remarried, she was raised by various surrogates away from the family.
Observing the relationship between her father and stepmother, and their affection toward her half brothers, she is said to have become embittered and developed a fierce personality.
Indeed, Kim Jong-il is quoted as saying: “When my sister turns violent, no one can stop her.
When Kim Jong-il started living with his second wife, Kim Kyong-hui sought to incite trouble, driven by a sense of rivalry.
After marrying Chang Song-taek, she began living something of a hedonistic life herself, but she scrutinized her husband’s conduct minutely, flying into a jealous rage over the slightest signs of infidelity.
Kim Jong-il has described his sister as “my only blood family whom I was asked to take care of by my mother till the moment she died.”
Their mother, Kim Jong-suk, is said to have died from hemorrhaging while giving premature birth caused by her distress over Kim Il-sung’s love affair with Kim Song-ae.
Kim Il-sung reportedly rushed to the hospital, but the door to her room was locked.
When she died, her doctor and Kim Jong-il were the only people present.
But Chan Giryok, who was Kim Jong-suk’s primary doctor and is now a doctor at Nagoya University in Japan, tells a different story.
According to Chan, Kim Jong-suk was at Kim Il-sung’s Pyongyang home near the Soviet Embassy, quarreling with him.
Watching from afar, the doctor saw Kim Il-sung holding a pistol.
The doctor, who was a surgeon, not an obstetrician, questioned the wisdom of summoning him to treat excessive bleeding from a premature delivery.
Kim Jong-il, who is known to have had a powerful attachment to his birth mother, cannot help but have been psychologically affected by witnessing his mother’s killing.
From the moment of his mother’s death, he kept his young sister close to him at all times.
Indeed, in a country where trust rarely exists, Kim Kyong-hui is the only blood relation whom Kim Jong-il has ever fully trusted.
Moreover, the two share the same lineage of the Great Leader, or Suryong,linked to Kim Jong-suk on the maternal side, and are fully devoted to the absolute supremacy of the Suryong and hereditary succession.
Speaking before the Central Committee after Kim Il-sung’s death, Kim Jong-il said, “Kim Kyong-hui is myself, the words of Kim Kyong-hui are my words, and instructions issued by Kim Kyong-hui are my instructions.”
Kim Kyong-hui’s intent to exercise power after her brother’s passing is supported by rumors that she helped arrange a traffic accident in June that killed Ri Je-gang, a senior party official and perceived guardian of Kim Jong-eun who reportedly attempted to oust Kim Kyong-hui and her close allies from power.
There is, indeed, a growing belief that Kim Jong-il might, at any moment, designate Kim Kyong-hui to serve as a caretaker for the third-generation successor after his death.
But Kim Kyong-hui may have other plans, such as becoming Kim Jong-il’s successor herself.
The threat from North Korea has always been that it might start another war, whether by miscalculation or design.
But, even if the “Young General” or his aunt turn out not to be unhinged megalomaniacs, the looming changeover opens a new era of uncertainty, particularly given North Korea’s economic woes.
Whether Kim Jong-eun or Kim Kyong-hui intend to soldier on in desperate isolation, or to bring in economic change, they lack the revolutionary credentials and grip on power needed to do so.
So when Kim Jong-il passes from the scene, and political instability meets economic blight, the regime could fall apart.
South Korean President Lee Myung-bak has wisely begun to prepare for that contingency by proposing a special “Unification Tax” to help pay the costs of the Kim dynasty’s eventual disintegration.
PRAGUE – Over the next 15 years, some two billion children will be born, 90% in the poorest parts of the world.
Providing these kids with a better start would be one of the greatest achievements that humanity could make.
Doing so also would be one of the most efficient uses of the resources that the world dedicates to development.
Next month, world leaders will gather at the United Nations in New York to agree on the Sustainable Development Goals: the targets that will succeed the 18 set in the year 2000 by the Millennium Development Goals.
The list of potential targets is impossibly long: 169 in all, toward which trillions of dollars will be spent.
How they are prioritized will be profoundly important to the lives of billions of people.
The Copenhagen Consensus, a research organization that I head, asked 82 eminent economists from around the world to carry out a cost-benefit analysis of the proposed targets, in order to establish which are likely to do the most good for people, the planet, and global prosperity over the next 15 years.
It turns out that one of the best ways to help is by focusing on improving the lives of children.
Our analysis identified 19 targets that would do the most good for every dollar spent.
In fact, each dollar spent on these 19 targets would do four times as much good as spending the same money on all 169.
It is not surprising that the top 19 include interventions improving the fortunes of the young; after all, they will grow up to become the workers and leaders of tomorrow.
Although the child mortality rate has been reduced by two-thirds since 1970, a horrifying number of children still die in their first years of life.
Nearly one-third were newborn babies who lost their lives because they were born prematurely or because of complications during birth.
We know from experience that it is perfectly feasible to target a 70% reduction in child mortality, but that doing so will be expensive, requiring the construction of effective health services to deliver high-quality care before, during, and after birth.
Taking into account a variety of far-reaching positive effects, we find that every dollar spent on neonatal care generates about $9 in benefits.
Among the additional positive effects would be more capable health services, providing better care to people of all ages.
Keeping kids healthy and well fed are two other highly cost-effective targets.
Since 1970, the international community has managed to vaccinate most of the world’s children against measles, tetanus, whooping cough, diphtheria, and polio.
For about $1 billion a year, vaccination programs could be expanded to prevent childhood pneumonia and diarrhea, saving another million lives annually.
In economic terms, each dollar spent would deliver $60 worth of welfare for the world’s youngest people.
Kids who do not get enough to eat during their vital early years do not develop properly and remain disadvantaged throughout their lives.
Even those who get enough overall calories can suffer ill effects, if they are deprived of essential vitamins, minerals, and protein.
A target to lower chronic malnutrition by 40%, by ensuring better access to micronutrients and sufficient food, would have a remarkable impact.
It would help children’s brains develop normally, allowing them to stay in school longer, learn more, and be more productive later in life.
Every dollar spent on better nutrition for the young produces $45 of social benefits.
Improving the quality of education is another worthy goal, as even the healthiest, best-fed children will struggle to learn when their schools are substandard.
To be sure, improving the quality of education is not easy; even rich countries struggle to do so.
The best education target would be to triple the number of children attending pre-school in sub-Saharan Africa, the world’s most deprived region.
Not only would this be relatively cheap; it would also provide children with a life-long yearning for learning, boosting their life chances and delivering benefits worth $33 for every dollar invested.
It is morally right that every child should be given the best chance to survive, eat well, stay healthy, and receive an education.
Healthy, well-educated kids grow into productive adults, capable of providing a better future for their own children, creating a virtuous circle that can help build a better, more prosperous world.
NEW HAVEN – The removal from the Chinese constitution of the provision limiting presidents to two five-year terms came as a shock to many.
For China, the institutionalization of leadership succession was one of Deng Xiaoping’s most important legacies, signaling an end to the wrenching instability of the chaotic leadership cult of Mao Zedong.
For the West, the term limit was an ideological bridge that led to a path of engagement.
Could its abolition be the tipping point for an already precarious Sino-American relationship?
To figure out what will change under a different framework for leadership succession, it is important to cut through the authorities’ opaque rhetoric – the “moderately well-off society” transitioning into the “new era” – and stress-test their basic development strategy.
While anything is possible, and there is always a risk of mistakes, my bet is that China stays its current course.
Succession or not, there can be no turning back from a transition that has brought a large, poor developing country to the brink of prosperity as a modern, high-income economy.
Initially, China’s leadership – responding to former Premier Wen Jiabao’s surprising 2007 critique of a Chinese economy that had become increasingly “unstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated, and unsustainable” – made its case from an analytical perspective.
Last October, in a speech to the 19th Party Congress, President Xi Jinping made the same point from an ideological perspective, reframing the so-called Marxian principal contradiction around the pitfalls of “unbalanced and inadequate” development.
Significantly, these two perspectives – analytical and ideological – take China to the same destination: a prosperous economy and society with a thriving middle class.
To get there, China must go through a transformative rebalancing, from manufacturing to services, from export dependence to domestic consumption, from state-owned to private, and from rural to urban.
This, in fact, was Xi’s highest priority on assuming office in late 2012, and it formed the rationale behind an unprecedented anti-corruption campaign aimed at dislodging deeply entrenched power blocs that have stymied the transition.
But now, five years later, the Chinese leadership is poised to tackle the next phase of the implementation challenge.
Behind the public façade of a confident leader, Xi has owned up to the possibility of failure.
From an analytical perspective, this has been expressed in terms of a Japanese-like stagnation if China mismanages its economy.
From an ideological perspective, an endgame of chaos and revolution looms if the “principal contradiction” is not resolved.
Given these mounting concerns, implementation risks are now being presented in a different light.
At the World Economic Forum in Davos in January, Liu He, China’s new vice premier for economic policy, hinted that upcoming reforms would be carried out with surprising speed.
In a recent signed commentary published in People’s Daily, he also noted that, “Strengthening the party’s overall leadership is the core issue.”
Liu, a master tactician, seems to be underscoring the link between leadership power and the pace of reforms.
The perceived need for greater leadership power – reflected in the elimination of the presidential term limit – has become a key element of the authorities’ implementation efforts.
Consistent with Xi’s early instincts, this may well be the only way for China to avoid the “blind alley” of which Deng warned in 1992.
Yes, viewed from the perspective of liberal democracies, China’s constitutional revision is a disappointing governance setback.
From China’s perspective, however, it may well be the only option to address its daunting implementation imperatives head-on.
And the recent experience of other countries, particularly the United States, certainly cautions against the Western tendency to conflate succession and leadership quality.
America’s leadership deficit is, in fact, pushing the US and China to the brink of a trade war.
The plight of the US middle class has been framed as a blame game, with China and its alleged unfair trading practices singled out as the culprit.
Yet the evidence points elsewhere: to a dramatic shortfall of domestic saving that leaves America dependent on surplus saving from abroad to fill the gap.
The result is a multilateral trade deficit, with China and 101 other countries, required to provide the foreign capital needed for the balance of payments.
In other words, China is actually an important part of America’s “solution” to its saving-short growth problem.
Yet US leaders find it expedient to make China a scapegoat.
The large tax cut enacted at the end of 2017 will expand the US federal budget deficit by $1.5 trillion over the next decade, pushing domestic saving even lower – an outcome that will lead to even wider trade deficits.
As if that’s not bad enough, a protectionist Trump administration has elevated anti-China tariffs to a central role in its international policy agenda.
Yet protectionism in the face of widening trade deficits spells nothing but trouble for frothy financial markets and a saving-short US economy.
And it risks the most serious rupture in the Sino-American relationship since 1989.
If China stays the course, the succession question is inconsequential – at least for the time being.
In the end, the quality of leadership is what matters most for both countries.
Sadly, those living in glass houses always find it easiest to throw stones.
DAVOS – In public debates around the world, women’s empowerment is increasingly being recognized as a top priority.
The question of how to provide more economic opportunities for women is firmly on the agenda at the World Economic Forum’s annual meeting in Davos this year.
And longtime advocates for women are feeling energized, as countless others – men and women alike – have come to recognize the urgency of the task.
Affording women and girls the opportunity to succeed is not just the right thing to do; it can also transform societies and economies for the good of all.
For example, bringing women’s labor force participation up to the same level as that of men would boost GDP by as much as 9% in Japan and 27% in India.
The International Monetary Fund has documented many other macroeconomic benefits associated with women’s empowerment.
Reducing gender gaps in employment and education has been shown to help economies diversify their exports.
Appointing more women to banking-supervision boards can prevent cozy groupthink, thereby ensuring greater stability and resilience in the financial sector.
Closing the gender gap may seem like a tall order, but it is essential for long-term economic development and prosperity.
The challenge for every country, then, is to make the most of all of its people’s talents.
Astonishingly, almost 90% of countries have one or more gender-based legal restrictions on the books.
In some countries, women still have limited property rights compared to men; in others, husbands have the right to forbid their wives from working.
Beyond legal barriers, women also face social and cultural obstacles that limit their access to education, work, and finance.
Now that public awareness of is growing, it is time to press ahead with concrete measures to help women remain in the workforce while raising a family.
For a glimpse of what that might look like, consider Norway, where affordable childcare and parental-leave schemes have proven successful in enabling both mothers and fathers to work.
But they are well worth the investment, given employed women’s enormous contribution to economic growth.
In Norway and other countries with similar policies, fathers now share equally in parental leave and child-rearing.
As a result, more women can pursue leadership roles in work and public life.
Of course, countries that are not yet at Norway’s level of economic development typically face other gender-related challenges, including limited access to water and education.
Unfortunately, while many countries have made progress in reducing gender gaps in primary-school enrollment, there is still much more work to be done at the secondary and tertiary levels.
As long as these gaps persist, women will not be able to aspire to political and economic power on an equal footing with men.
Accordingly, Norway has made girls’ education a top priority in its international-development programs.
Beyond education, ensuring that women in developing countries have access to finance is critical, because it enables them to participate fully in the economy, including as entrepreneurs.
When women are empowered to start their own businesses, they can drive innovation and help their countries prosper.
Because women’s labor-force participation is so important for growth, organizations such as the IMF are committed to working with governments around the world to empower women economically.
IMF-supported programs in Egypt and Jordan, for example, include measures to boost investment in public nurseries and safe public transportation.
In addition to specific policies, today’s conversation has increasingly focused on the need for wider social change.
And now that movements such as #Equalpay and #MeToo have gained so much momentum, it looks like that change could be coming.
It has been inspiring to see so many women, girls, and – yes – men speaking out against retrograde attitudes toward women, which have been holding all of us back.
With the global economy recovering, governments must now lay the foundation for long-term growth, by creating the conditions for women everywhere to realize their full potential.
CHICAGO – There are many arguments against government paternalism: apart from limiting individual choice (for example, the choice to remain uninsured in the current health-care debate in the United States) and preventing individuals from learning, history suggests time and again that the conventional wisdom prevalent in society is wrong.
And, since governments typically try to enforce the conventional wisdom, the consequences could be disastrous, because they are magnified by the state’s coordinating – and coercive – power.
A clear example is financial regulation, which in many ways is a form of paternalism.
In the US, the low risk assigned to senior tranches of mortgage-backed securities made them attractive instruments for banks to hold, given the relatively high return they offered.
And, because the regulator had pronounced them safe, far too many banks overloaded on them, rendering them even more risky when the banks tried to sell them at the same time.
Other examples of the danger of the coordinating power of government paternalism abound.
As I drive to downtown Chicago, I pass a series of high-rise housing projects, meant in their time to be the miracle cure for homelessness, poverty, unemployment, and crime.
Today, they are seen as the best way to concentrate and perpetuate many of those ills.
Not only were the housing projects kept a safe distance from areas that had good jobs, but, with few residents experiencing stable families and livelihoods, there were not enough local examples of success to guide young people.
No doubt we will discover some unintended consequences in the future, and the power of government coordination will ensure that those consequences are widespread.
Social security is a paternalistic form of forced savings for old age, preventing individuals from consuming and saving as they please.
It exists, in part, because individuals know that civilized societies will never stand by and watch the elderly starve.
So individuals are forced to save in order to prevent them from gaming the system – not saving when young, knowing that they will be assured a minimum level of support by a humane society when old.
Similarly, the mandated purchase of insurance in the Obama administration’s health-care bill is an attempt to prevent the young and the healthy from remaining uninsured and turning to the government for support only when they discover that they need it.
So, if paternalism has benefits as well as costs, how do we get the former without the latter?
My colleague, Richard Thaler, along with Cass Sunstein, who currently serves in the Obama administration, wrote a best-selling book, Nudge, in which they suggest a way to reduce our uneasiness with paternalism.
Essentially, by exploiting behavioral quirks, they would nudge people into making decisions that are good for them, even while individuals have complete freedom to change their mind.
So libertarian paternalism, in their view, eliminates one of the main objections to paternalism – that it constrains individual choice.
For example, in deciding how their pension savings will be allocated, most people simply choose the default option in their employer-offered plan.
Often, the default option is unsuitable for most individuals – for instance, it typically allocates all savings to low-return money-market funds.
Sunstein and Thaler would have the employer choose a default option that works for most people, such as 60% in equities, 30% in bonds, and 10% in money-market funds.
The libertarian part is that the employee has the right to opt out of the default option.
Because people rarely move away from the default option, the employer’s paternalistic choice prevails, and we get libertarian paternalism.
The problem is that the semblance of choice in libertarian paternalism is an illusion.
Choice remains unexercised, because individuals do not consciously think through their decision.
If their choices can be directed, is this not paternalism plain and simple, rendered more sinister because individuals are unaware that they are being nudged, and cannot raise their guard?
One response is to point out that most plans already have a default option that determines savings allocations.
Sunstein and Thaler merely say that the default option should be set in a way that is good for people, and clearly they have an idea of what is good.
In choosing the default option, the government or the employer nudges all employees into prevailing fads such as “buy equity for the long run.”
This, they believe, is better than the current typical default option of putting individuals’ money into money-market funds.
But it may be worse: coordinating everyone into risky asset investments may be more dangerous than coordinating them into boring investments like money-market funds.
What if there were no default option, and individuals were sent repeated, and increasingly urgent, reminders to choose an allocation if they did not choose one already.
The conventional wisdom could be offered as a recommendation, along with explanations of why it makes sense, but it would not be the default.
Some people would differ from the conventional wisdom, benefiting the system by introducing some variety and resilience.
More generally, the flaw in some forms of libertarian paternalism is that the free choice that it appears to offer leaves the paternalism largely unconstrained.
Would it not be far better to force conscious choice in order to limit the consequences of paternalistic mistakes?
JERUSALEM: Whatever the outcome of the summit convened by President Clinton at Camp David between Prime Minister Ehud Barak of Israel and PLO Chairman Yassar Arafat, one thing is clear: the moment of truth for Israeli-Palestinian peace negotiations has arrived.
Defections from Prime Minister Barak’s government and coalition, including the resignation of his foreign minister, David Levy, who refused to accompany Barak to Washington, will make the negotiations even more dramatic.
Israel and the Palestinians have been negotiating since 1995, when they signed the Oslo Accords whose major achievement was mutual recognition and autonomy in areas of the West Bank and Gaza for the Palestinians.
Further negotiations were to decide the final status of the Palestinian Authority (ie, whether Palestine is to be an independent state), the border issue, the future of Jewish settlements, whether refugees could return to their homes, and the final status of Jerusalem, which both sides claim as their capital but which Israel controls in its entirety.
According to a series of agreements signed over the years within this framework, a Palestinian Authority, with Yassar Arafat as its head, was established.
Arafat returned from exile in Tunis to Gaza, and Israel turned over to the Palestinian Authority most of Gaza and most of the towns in the West Bank.
Today, although the Palestinian Authority controls less than 30% of the West Bank and Gaza, over 80% of Palestinians in these territories live under Palestinian rule, free from Israeli military occupation.
A Palestinian legislature and cabinet have opened, as well as Palestinian police and security services.
The economy in areas under Palestinian control is administered by the Palestinian Authority, as are education and other internal matters.
While economic results are mixed, the most important change in the daily life of Palestinians is that most no longer live under Israeli rule.
Yet Jewish settlements, built mainly under the right-wing governments of Menachem Begin, Yitzhak Shamir, and Benjamin Netanyahu, remain in place, and relations between settlers - some of them extremely radical nationalists - and Palestinians remain raw.
Prime Minister Yitzhak Rabin’s assassination by a nationalist-religious extremist Jewish student slowed the peace process, especially after Netanyahu was elected Prime Minister in 1996.
But in 1999 Ehud Barak, Labour’s leader, was elected Prime Minister in a sweeping personal victory that restored momentum to the peace negotiations.
Although most territorial issues have been negotiated, the most difficult ones, which were intentionally left to the latter stages of the negotiations, now must be addressed.
To go back to the 1967 dividing lines, which cut the city in two, is impossible, especially as over 120,000 Israelis now live across the old dividing line.
Should they stay, be partly evacuated, or be put partly under Palestinian rule?
These are the thorny problems, which combine political, strategic, religious and symbolic issues that transcend the human dimensions of what is to happen to the populations - Jewish and Arab - involved.
Prime Minister Barak’s position suffers from a very brittle coalition, and he has recently lost his parliamentary majority.
In the past he condoned acts of violence against Israelis in order to please fundamentalist radicals, which greatly diminished the trust of the Israeli public (and not only of right-wing extremists) in Arafat’s credibility and reliability.
It is under these circumstances that an outside push is required, and this is what President Clinton provided in launching this week’s Camp David talks.
If no agreement on the last remaining issues is achieved, escalation will ensue: the Palestinians may declare independence unilaterally;
Prime Minister Barak appears ready to accept an independent Palestinian state - something no Israeli leader has, until now, been willing to do.
He has made clear that perhaps 30,000 settlers, may be evacuated to Israel proper or could remain in their homes under Palestinian rule.
This is a courageous and novel Israeli step, with an enormous price paid by Barak.
But the Palestinians want all the settlers to leave, a political impossibility for any Israeli government.
This is why a compromise is needed - and will in all probability be reached at Camp David.
It is difficult for Barak and Arafat, when in conclave with Clinton, to allow America’s President to fail.
The Camp David talks will likely witness a series of tough bargaining rounds with ups and downs, real and concocted crises, and a lot of tip-toeing to the edge by both sides.
But the logic of the situation is that, sooner or later, perhaps after a crisis or two, compromise will be found.
Reaching that point will be arduous for both sides, but as President Clinton said when announcing the summit, the alternative is far worse.
CAMBRIDGE – The United States Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) recently rejected proposed rules aimed at making money-market funds safer in a financial crisis – a rejection that has caused consternation among observers and other regulators.
Given the risks that money market funds can pose to the global financial system, as shown by their destabilizing role in the 2008 financial crisis, it is not hard to see why they are worried.
Money-market funds take excess cash from investors and use it to purchase short-term IOUs from businesses, banks, and other financial institutions.
They mimic bank accounts by allowing investors to write checks and promise that their investment’s value will not fall.
In 2012, American “prime” money-market funds, which buy bank and corporate debt, were worth nearly $1.5 trillion.
The money flowing through these funds went to many of the world’s largest banks, including not just the obvious US suspects (JP Morgan Chase, Bank of America, and Citi), but also major European and Japanese banks such as Barclays, Deutsche Bank, Bank of Tokyo, Sumitomo, Credit Suisse, and ING.
These six international banks alone accounted for nearly 20% of the prime money-market funds’ value.
Many readers know how money-market funds work: An investor buys a $1.00 share from the XYZ fund, which keeps each share’s value at a constant $1.00, allowing the investor to believe that the money – invested in a pool of safe, secure, but not always government-guaranteed assets – is on deposit.
Even if the asset pool declines in value, the fund’s managers keep the value of each share at $1.00 by rounding upward the fund’s real value.
If the fund’s losses are big enough that rounding off still leaves it short of a stable $1.00 value, the fund “breaks the buck.”
The Reserve Fund, a well-established money-market fund with too many unpaid IOUs from Lehman, could not keep its value steady.
All money-market funds then became suspect, and many investors fled – withdrawing one-third of a trillion dollars in a single week.
Since much of the money-market funds’ assets are IOUs from the world’s biggest banks, the withdrawals weakened the already-shaky global banking system.
The Federal Reserve, seeking to stem the growing panic and stabilize the American and international banking system, promptly guaranteed the value of all money-market funds.
The proposals that the SEC rejected were aimed at making money-market funds more robust by requiring that each fund maintain capital reserves or let its value “float” – and not be rounded up – to reflect its true, underlying risk.
The proposal would also have required that money-market funds hold back a fraction of some redemptions, thereby making investors take some risk that funds might not have complete transactional liquidity if their investments weakened.
A majority of the commissioners turned down the proposals after substantial lobbying from the mutual-fund industry.
If money-market funds had to maintain capital reserves, industry representatives argued, yields to investors would decline and the industry’s profits would suffer.
And, if retail investors saw their money-market funds’ values declining from the amount that they had invested, and if they knew that they could not get all of their money back immediately, the funds would become less attractive.
Banks are obliged to hold reserves, maintain capital, and pay deposit insurance to ensure that they can honor their deposits.
The mutual-fund industry, one can assume, feared that the SEC’s rules would induce customers to redirect much of their cash directly into banks.
As a result of the SEC’s inaction, money-market funds will continue to operate outside the scope of bank-style rules on capital and reserves, even though investors treat them like bank accounts.
Unlike banks, though, they do not pay the government to insure their investors.
But the 2008 financial crisis showed that, when push comes to shove, the government will backstop money-market funds nonetheless.
The rejected proposals are thus good policy: money-market funds should be made safer – via capital requirements and liquidity restrictions – because they already receive a de facto government guarantee.
Their steady value makes them appear safer to investors than they are to the world’s financial system.
The SEC’s rejection of the proposed rules demonstrates the power of concerted lobbying – and that concentrated interests often trump diffuse benefits.
Typically, an interest group lobbies Congress, blandishing persuasive arguments, campaign contributions, and other support; often enough members – or enough key members – come to see the merit of the group’s point of view (or at least vote as if they do).
One might think that banks would counter-balance the mutual-fund industry’s lobbying efforts, because the likely effect of forcing money-market funds to pay for more of their systemic costs would be to expand funds flowing directly to banks.
But inflows through money-market funds are not so bad for banks, which get the cash without having to set aside reserves or pay for deposit insurance.
Its lobbyists told the SEC commissioners that current rules already did everything possible to ensure safety; that retail investors want money-market funds’ steady value; that change would hurt all investors; and that the recent Dodd-Frank financial-reform legislation disrupts regulators’ ability to bail out money-market funds next time.
Other regulators were watching, as were academics and journalists – and some regulators may now feel compelled to take over the money-market safety rules from the SEC or push the SEC back into action.
With no one having a direct financial interest in the outcome pressing an alternative view, the SEC’s initial decision was as predictable as it was bad.
CAMBRIDGE – As a graduate student at MIT, I had the opportunity to work with Professors Robert Langer and Ram Sasisekharan in an environment rife with innovative thinking.
We asked what could be possible, and were driven to pursue revolutionary technologies that were widely considered impossible.
This experience instilled in me a simple but powerful credo: think big.
If one is willing to traverse the boundary of the unknown, one should pursue the course that promises the greatest potential impact.
In exploring a wide range of subjects – energy, agriculture, medicine, and more – one approach has, in my experience, emerged as the most effective: begin with the end in mind.
By identifying the problems and envisioning the preferred solution, one can define the set of constraints into which technological innovation fits, and establish a clear, albeit often difficult, path to its realization.
A fundamental requirement of this approach is an open mind, unconstrained by the subject’s idiosyncratic dogma.
Those who are immersed in a field have an established view of what is possible, based on some combination of previous successes, citation bias, current limits of knowledge, and truth – and it is often difficult to distinguish these sources.
But the newcomer asking the most basic questions begins to notice logical inconsistencies, from which the real constraints on solutions and technological limits arise.
With well-defined constraints, a clear path for developing innovative technologies – one that accounts for both the known and the unknown – can be planned.
This unconventional approach has consistently produced groundbreaking technologies that, if successfully implemented, revolutionize a field.
What might be more interesting, however, is the response that such progress often elicits: “This seems so obvious.
Early in my career, this reaction troubled me; it made me wonder whether I had, in fact, overlooked something obvious.
But, as my experience with entrepreneurial innovation has grown, I have realized that the response is rooted in the fact that most people are trapped in a specific doctrine, which obscures the innovative solutions that lie beyond its borders.
Companies exhibit similar behavior when it comes to acquiring innovative technologies, adhering to ineffective, restrictive processes, despite an ostensibly obvious alternative: the efficient systems that manufacturers use to secure inputs for production.
In order to establish a clear, low-risk path to producing their goods at a predictable (and profitable) cost, companies employ teams dedicated to securing the relevant supply chains, controlling inventory, managing the production process, and so on – from the point of origin to the point of consumption.
In many cases, this involves maintaining relationships with a dedicated network of suppliers, with which producers share detailed product specifications.
Doing so ensures that producers get exactly what they need, and that suppliers are able to deliver the correct inputs.
The result is a well-defined, highly productive, and mutually beneficial working relationship.
By contrast, the innovation supply chain (the process by which companies obtain and/or develop future products and improve on their current products) tends to be characterized by inefficiency, ambiguity, and competition.
But only about 15% of the drugs that the US Food and Drug Administration has approved recently were developed by the same company that markets and sells them, meaning that many major pharmaceutical companies depend on the innovation ecosystem to advance their products.
Drug companies often lament that the firms from which they are sourcing innovations do not perform clinical trials to their specifications, forcing them to repeat the work.
Nevertheless, they are reticent about providing such specifications in advance – even when innovators request them – perhaps to protect their market position or internal efforts.
Just as individual innovators must challenge conventional wisdom, companies must replace the established approach to the innovation supply chain with one that more closely resembles how they create and maintain a manufacturing supply chain.
If market incumbents are willing to share “innovation specifications” (which should not be confused with innovation methods), they can develop an effective network of innovation suppliers, thereby increasing the reliability of the product-development engine.
And, as with effective manufacturing supply chains, the supplier and the purchaser must build a reciprocal relationship, in which they do not compete with each other, practically or economically, in the specific activities that they are performing.
Indeed, a common approach – defining key market needs, coupling them with solution constraints, and pushing the boundaries of current thinking – applies to all kinds of innovation.
With an innovation ecosystem organized along these lines, “obvious” advances could occur significantly faster.
LONDON – Financial markets are giving a thumbs-down to Brexit, and they are right to do so.
But because it is finance, not democratic civil society, that is pushing back against the United Kingdom’s decision to leave the European Union, the Brexit debate will become more bitter, and the fallout more severe.
The June referendum’s initial economic effects were negligible, and may even have been slightly positive, now that the UK’s post-referendum growth figures are being revised upward.
But the British pound is sinking, the cost of financing UK government debt is rising, and the process of actually withdrawing from the EU could be highly destructive.
Having decided to leave the EU, it is in the UK’s interest to manage withdrawal in a way that minimizes short-term adjustment costs and long-term adverse effects.
Likewise, it is in the EU’s interest to mitigate not only the economic impact, but also the reputational damage implied by the loss of a major member state.
Ideally, participants in a conflict think coolly and rationally about their long-term interests, and act accordingly; unfortunately, they rarely do.
Just as a married couple’s divorce often leads to bitterness and pitched battles that benefit only lawyers, the UK’s divorce from the EU will almost certainly descend into acrimony.
As hostility rises, an amicable settlement will become less likely, and everyone will end up losing more than they have gained.
There are three potential doom spirals already baked into the UK-EU divorce proceedings.
First, there are political and structural risks to the EU if more member states leave.
When the bloc loses a single member state, it looks like a misfortune that can be attributed to the departing country’s domestic peculiarities.
But if the bloc loses more member states, it starts to look like negligence, mismanagement, or a fundamental design flaw.
Thus, the EU has a strong incentive to make Brexit as painful as possible for the UK, in order to discourage countries such as the Netherlands, Sweden, or Finland from following the British example.
Opinion polls show that support for the EU has surged in many member states since the UK’s referendum.
Rather, many Europeans share the view that former British Prime Minister David Cameron blundered by calling for a referendum on EU membership.
Immediately after the referendum, German Chancellor Angela Merkel beseeched Europeans not to be needlessly “horrid” (garstig) when thinking about the EU’s divorce terms for the UK.
But, because the UK knows that the EU fears disintegration, it will inevitably read vindictiveness into any position the EU takes.
UK negotiators will have to assume that their EU counterparts are trying to make the path out of the EU as economically and politically rocky as possible.
British negotiators will then respond to EU negotiators’ domino-theory logic by trying to make the process as painful as possible for the rest of the EU.
Indeed, the UK’s “Leave” constituency already firmly believes that the UK would be better off on its own, and that Brexit will hurt Europeans much more than it hurts Britons.
This means that the Leave camp has a powerful incentive to fulfill its own prophecy.
Britain cannot simply start beating the Europeans at their own game by reviving its automobile industry, or by making its own wine to rival French and Italian producers.
The principle of comparative advantage demands that the UK emphasize its service industries, and especially financial services.
The City of London already drives the British economy, and one post-Brexit scenario has London’s role as a global financial center actually increasing.
To make that happen, the British government would have to establish a regime of low taxes, light regulations, and favorable treatment toward both skilled and unskilled immigrants working in and around financial services.
But every part of this plan conflicts with the government’s goal of reining in the finance industry and limiting migrant flows.
Indeed, strengthening fat-cat capitalism is precisely the opposite of what British Prime Minister Theresa May promised to do when she succeeded Cameron.
In fact, the Leave camp is dominated by people in England and Wales who feel cut off from the gains of globalization, and voted against the privileges and riches of the glittering global megacity of London.
Thus, one of the UK’s most effective negotiating strategies would deeply divide Britain itself, and especially the governing Conservative Party.
That points to the third doom loop: migration, which weighed so heavily on the outcome of the Brexit referendum.
The May government now must demonstrate to voters that it is doing something about migrants and foreign workers in the UK.
But as long as Britain has a dynamic economy, it will attract immigrants, regardless of whether they are formally admitted.
The government can guarantee less immigration only by wrecking the economy, which would then be blamed, naturally, on European viciousness.
Meanwhile, if the UK becomes a low-cost offshore financial center that sheds jobs, it could pose a danger to its neighbors.
Continental Europe might be tempted to reject financial capitalism altogether, in favor of a growth strategy based on large state-driven investment projects.
Ultimately, Brexit could come to resemble the dismemberment of a body, with the British financial head separated from the European real economy.
Britain would appear less attractive, Europe would withdraw into itself, and each side would blame the other.
But it also adheres to the bitter logic of divorce – which is why most couples opt for counseling.
It is the average annualized growth of US consumer spending over the past 14 quarters – calculated in inflation-adjusted terms from the first quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of 2011.
Never before in the post-World War II era have American consumers been so weak for so long.
This one number encapsulates much of what is wrong today in the US – and in the global economy.
From the first quarter of 2008 through the second period of 2009, consumer demand fell for six consecutive quarters at a 2.2% annual rate.
Not surprisingly, the contraction was most acute during the depths of the Great Crisis, when consumption plunged at a 4.5% rate in the third and fourth quarters of 2008.
As the US economy bottomed out in mid-2009, consumers entered a second phase – a very subdued recovery.
Annualized real consumption growth over the subsequent eight-quarter period from the third quarter of 2009 through the second quarter of 2011 averaged 2.1%.
That is the most anemic consumer recovery on record – fully 1.5 percentage points slower than the 12-year pre-crisis trend of 3.6% that prevailed between 1996 and 2007.
As part of the annual reworking of the US National Income and Product Accounts that was released in July 2011, Commerce Department statisticians slashed their earlier estimates of consumer spending.
The 14-quarter growth trend from early 2008 to mid-2011 was cut from 0.5% to 0.2%; the bulk of the downward revision was concentrated in the first six quarters of this period – for which the estimate of the annualized consumption decline was doubled, from 1.1% to 2.2%.
This is, by far, one of the most significant I have ever seen.
We all knew it was tough for the American consumer – but this revision portrays the crisis-induced cutbacks and subsequent anemic recovery in a much dimmer light.
By exploiting a record credit bubble to borrow against an unprecedented property bubble, American consumers spent well beyond their means for many years.
When both bubbles burst, over-extended US households had no choice but to cut back and rebuild their damaged balance sheets by paying down outsize debt burdens and rebuilding depleted savings.
While household-sector debt was pruned to 115% of disposable personal income in early 2011 from the peak of 130% hit in 2007, it remains well in excess of the 75% average of the 1970-2000 period.
And, while the personal saving rate rose to 5% of disposable income in the first half of 2011 from the rock-bottom 1.2% low hit in mid-2005, this is far short of the nearly 8% norm that prevailed during the last 30 years of the twentieth century.
With retrenchment and balance-sheet repair only in its early stages, the zombie-like behavior of American consumers should persist.
The 2.1% consumption growth trend realized during the anemic recovery of the past two years could well be indicative of what lies ahead for years to come.
Such an outcome would have three profound implications for the economic outlook: First, since consumer demand still accounts for 71% of real GDP, a protracted shortfall in trend consumption represents a major headwind for overall US economic growth.
While misguided Washington policymakers would like nothing better than for consumers to return to their old risky ways and start spending again, over-extended American households now know better.
The heavy artillery of monetary and fiscal stimulus is being wasted on attempts to short-circuit balance-sheet repair.
Second, persistent weakness in consumption and GDP growth puts the US economy on a much weaker growth trajectory than that which is built into the government’s long-term budget estimates.
The Congressional Budget Office is assuming 3.4% average growth in real GDP over the 2013 to 2016 period.
If the growth trend is one percentage point lower – a distinct possibility in an era of protracted consumption weakness – budget deficits would be a significantly higher.
Indeed, a CBO rule of thumb equates a sustained one-percentage-point shortfall in real GDP growth with budget deficits that are roughly $3 trillion larger over a ten-year period.
Needless to say, such an outcome would spell serious trouble for America’s already-contentious deficit-and-debt debate.
Finally, no other economy is capable of filling the void left by a protracted shortfall of US consumption.
Europe and Japan are in no position to take up the slack, and consumer sectors in the world’s major developing economies – especially China – lack the scale and dynamism to take over.
So enduring weakness in US consumption implies pressure on the growth of export-led developing economies.
The good news is that will force them to embrace long-overdue rebalancing strategies aimed at stimulating domestic consumer demand.
While measures adapted in the depths of the crisis – massive fiscal and monetary stimuli – were effective in placing a bottom under the free-fall, they have been ineffective in sparking meaningful recovery.
Instead, the US needs a menu of policies tailored to the needs and pressures bearing down on American consumers.
Some possibilities: debt forgiveness to speed up the deleveraging process; creative saving policies that restore financial security to crisis-battered Americans; and, of course, jobs and the income they generate.
The US economy – as well as the global economy – cannot get back on its feet without the American consumer.
It is time to look beyond ideology – on the left as well as on the right – and frame the policy debate with that key consideration in mind.
LAGOS – Abuja, Nigeria’s sparkling new capital, is a city under siege.
In August, Boko Haram, a shadowy and violent Muslim sect operating in the northeastern part of the country, bombed a building housing staff of the United Nations in the central part of the city, killing 23 people and seriously injuring 86.
It was Nigeria’s first suicide bombing, and the audacity and ferocity of the attack have thrown government officials and citizens alike into panic mode.
Ever since its bloody repression of the Igbo secession bid in the late 1960’s, Nigeria’s military has prided itself on its ability to “neutralize” ethno-religious insurgency and preserve the country’s unity.
Throughout the 1990’s and into the first years of the new millennium, it battled youth-led armed militias in the Niger Delta to assert the central government’s control of the region’s substantial oil receipts.
The O’odua People’s Congress, an ethnic self-determination movement in the western part of the country, was also met with military force.
But attempts to apply the same severe medicine to Boko Haram have backfired.
A military contingent that the government dispatched in 2009 to Maiduguri, the northern city that has become the sect’s bastion, killed its leader, Mohammed Yusuf, his father-in-law, and many of their followers.
But the rump of Boko Haram then went underground, before re-emerging more ferocious and better organized.
Yusuf has since become a martyr, and daily attacks on hotels, bars, churches, and schools are usually followed with admonitions to Nigerians to shun the Western way of life.
(Boko Haram, loosely translated, means “Western education is forbidden.”)
Spokesmen for the sect, which began as a fringe Islamic revivalist movement in 2002, say that their mission is to replace the secular state in northern Nigeria with a theocracy based on Sharia law.
They also want the government to rebuild houses, mosques, and Islamic schools destroyed during the 2009 attack.
The sect holds the northern political and religious elite in contempt, and does not recognize the authority of the Sultan of Sokoto, leader of Nigerian Muslims.
Indeed, they blame northern political and religious leaders for the region’s mounting economic and political problems, and have killed several in the past two years.
But Boko Haram is only part of a profound crisis gripping Nigeria’s vast northern region.
Ordinary northerners still believe that President Goodluck Jonathan, who hails from the Niger Delta in the south, cheated their hero, Muhammadu Buhari, a retired general and former head of state, in last April’s elections.
More than 800 northerners died as enraged youths took to the streets in protest.
Moreover, unemployment and poverty rates are higher in Nigeria’s north than in other parts of the country.
A powerful and wealthy feudal elite that has maintained power for two centuries through a mix of authoritarianism and religious sentiment now feels embattled following its loss of power in Abuja and, with it, the means to dispense patronage to formerly obsequious followers.
Given all of this, it is perhaps not surprising that impoverished and restive northern youth are joining Boko Haram in droves.
The increasing sophistication of the attacks on public buildings has led to speculation that the sect is linked to international terrorist networks, probably Al Qaeda in the Maghreb or Al Shabab in Somalia.
To make Boko Haram appear more potent, its members play up this alleged affiliation, and even claim to have the support of “important” people in the northern part of the country.
Following threats that university campuses in the south would be bombed, anxious parents recalled their children and now warn them to stay away from the north.
Nigeria, a fragile coalition of ethnic groups, may not be sliding into a second civil war (yet), but inter-ethnic relations could worsen if the Boko Haram menace is not quickly tackled.
Two days after former President Olusegun Obasanjo traveled to Maiduguri and met with a relative of the sect’s slain leader to initiate peace talks, a Boko Haram faction murdered the 49-year-old man.
The military task force deployed to the area is still in place, and civil-society groups have accused soldiers of pillaging private property, raping women, and shooting innocent citizens.
Since taking power last April, President Jonathan has pursued a purely military strategy towards the sect.
With the tentative peace moves stifled, the position of the hawks in his government, particularly that of National Security Adviser Owoye Andrew Azazi, will likely be strengthened.
The United States, Israel, and Britain have also expressed willingness to provide Nigeria with counter-terrorism support, but this “help,” if accepted, would only inflame passions in the country’s Islamic belt.
The fundamental problem in northern Nigeria, as in other parts of the country, is deepening poverty, mass unemployment, and the widespread belief that Nigeria’s leaders are only looking after their own interests.
After 100 days in office, Jonathan and his ruling People’s Democratic Party appear indecisive about how to tackle these challenges.
After the sound and fury of its recent elections, Africa’s most populous country appears set to face violence and chaos born of deprivation and neglect.
WARSAW – Back in the 1990s, in the early days of Central Europe’s post-communist transition, Poland’s current de facto ruler Jarosław Kaczyński inelegantly exclaimed, “It’s our fucking turn” (Teraz kurwa my).
More recently, Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán’s commissioner for culture, Imre Kerényi, himself a communist before 1989, said much the same thing: “It’s our turn.”
Polish Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Culture Piotr Gliński has just removed the internationally renowned artist Jan Klata as director of Kraków’s Teatr Stary, one of Poland’s preeminent cultural institutions.
In Klata’s place, he has installed Marek Mikos, a former theater critic with no experience managing a theater or directing plays.
More than 80 directors, including such luminaries as Krzysztof Warlikowski, Krystian Lupa, and Mariusz Treliński, have already united to boycott working with the theater’s new leadership and, more broadly, to protest the government’s cultural policy.
In Hungary, the government has long had complete control over theaters and public universities.
But it is now setting its sights on a private institution: Central European University.
On May 17, the European Parliament adopted a resolution criticizing legislation in Hungary that would force CEU to shut down.
But that is scant comfort to Orbán’s critics, because the resolution does not sanction Orbán himself.
By failing to impose effective penalties on countries that violate its laws and values, the European Union is merely exposing its impotence, and encouraging ever more egregious behavior from the likes of Orbán and Kaczyński.
Article 7 of the Treaty of Lisbon provides for the suspension of a rogue EU member state’s voting rights.
But, because this “nuclear option” requires a unanimous vote by all EU member states, everyone knows that it will never be used.
In fact, Article 7 is such an ineffective deterrent that it serves rule-breakers’ interests, by all but guaranteeing that they will not be punished.
Orbán has been scamming the EU for years and encouraging other populists to pursue their own authoritarian goals – and with EU funds to boot.
But the weakening of the rule of law is not just a domestic matter in Hungary or Poland.
Because member states must recognize each other’s court judgments, the populist takeover of the Polish and Hungarian judiciaries undermines the entire EU’s legal order.
Violations of democracy in Hungary and Poland are thus violations of European democracy itself.
If there is no free press in Hungary, how can we even know if the country’s representatives in the European Parliament have been democratically elected and are acting in good faith?
The fact that we have to ask shows that the current mechanisms for defending liberal democracy are ineffective, and that sanctions will never enter into force.
There is no hope that Orbán and his Fidesz party will leave office anytime soon.
Orbán, a much more capable politician than Kaczyński, has such a tight grip on power that Hungarians will have to wait for external pressure to be brought to bear.
And yet even Germany, the only country that can exert significant influence, has failed to stop Orbán from shuttering CEU.
The first is loyalty within the European People’s Party (EPP), a faction of center-right national political parties in the European Parliament.
Though this connection has lost some importance, the fact is that, of 199 EPP members who voted, 107 voted opposed the May 17 resolution, and 40 abstained, leaving just 67 voting in favor.
Indeed, the EPP retains a significant 27-seat advantage over the Socialist Party in the European Parliament.
Why, then, does the EPP continue to act as Orban’s hostage?
Second, unlike Kaczynski’s Law and Justice Party (PiS), Fidesz has an even more extreme party to its right – Jobbik – which enjoys significant support.
Orbán can keep Germany and others at bay by holding out the grim prospect of a Jobbik-led government coming to power in his stead.
But this threat is quickly losing its salience, as Jobbik increasingly moves toward the center, while Fidesz drifts to the right.
Third, Orbán’s alliance with Horst Seehofer, the president of Germany’s Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU), affords him further political protection.
Seehofer shares Orbán’s stance on refugees and treats Hungary much like Germany treats Turkey.
“Today, Bavaria’s borders are being defended by Hungary,” Orbán said at a joint press conference with Seehofer in September 2015, before calling himself “the captain of one of the Bavarian minister-president’s border fortresses.”
The EU pays Turkey in euros, while Seehofer pays Orbán by tolerating policies that no German politician should.
German companies make a lot of money in the so-called Visegrád Four – the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, and Slovakia – which together amount to Germany’s largest trade partner.
On its own, Hungary is Germany’s 14th-largest trade partner in terms of both exports and imports.
For comparison, Poland is Germany’s eighth-largest partner in exports and sixth in imports.
But Germany is Hungary’s largest economic partner, accounting for more than 30% of exports and more than half of foreign direct investment.
Continuing a policy of appeasement towards Orbán makes no sense.
If CEU is forced to close, German Chancellor Angela Merkel’s government will bear considerable responsibility.
LIMA – As central bankers and finance ministers from around the globe gather for the International Monetary Fund’s annual meetings here in Peru, the emerging world is rife with symptoms of increasing economic vulnerability.
Gone are the days when IMF meetings were monopolized by the problems of the advanced economies struggling to recover from the 2008 financial crisis.
Now, the discussion has shifted back toward emerging economies, which face the risk of financial crises of their own.
While no two financial crises are identical, all tend to share some telltale symptoms: a significant slowdown in economic growth and exports, the unwinding of asset-price booms, growing current-account and fiscal deficits, rising leverage, and a reduction or outright reversal in capital inflows.
The turning point came in 2013, when the expectation of rising interest rates in the United States and falling global commodity prices brought an end to a multi-year capital-inflow bonanza that had been supporting emerging economies’ growth.
China’s recent slowdown, by fueling turbulence in global capital markets and weakening commodity prices further, has exacerbated the downturn throughout the emerging world.
But emerging economies may also be experiencing another common symptom of an impending crisis, one that is much tougher to detect and measure: hidden debts.
Sometimes connected with graft, hidden debts do not usually appear on balance sheets or in standard databases.
Their features morph from one crisis to the next, as do the players involved in their creation.
As a result, they often go undetected, until it is too late.
Indeed, it was not until after the eruption of the 1994-1995 peso crisis that the world learned that Mexico’s private banks had taken on a significant amount of currency risk through off-balance-sheet borrowing (derivatives).
Likewise, before the 1997 Asian financial crisis, the IMF and financial markets were unaware that Thailand’s central-bank reserves had been nearly depleted (the $33 billion total that was reported did not account for commitments in forward contracts, which left net reserves of only about $1 billion).
And, until Greece’s crisis in 2010, the country’s fiscal deficits and debt burden were thought to be much smaller than they were, thanks to the use of financial derivatives and creative accounting by the Greek government.
And, unfortunately, there are severe obstacles to exposing them – beginning with the opaqueness of China’s financial transactions with other emerging economies over the past decade.
During its domestic infrastructure boom, China financed major projects – often connected to mining, energy, and infrastructure – in other emerging economies.
Given that the lending was denominated primarily in US dollars, it is subject to currency risk, adding another dimension of vulnerability to emerging-economy balance sheets.
But the extent of that lending is largely unknown, because much of it came from development banks in China that are not included in the data collected by the Bank for International Settlements (the primary global source for such information).
And, because the loans were rarely issued as securities in international capital markets, it is not included in, say, World Bank databases, either.
For example, data collected on a project-by-project basis by the Global Economic Governance Initiative and the Inter-American Dialog could provide some insight into Chinese lending to several Latin American economies.
For example, it seems that, from 2009 to 2014, total Chinese lending to Venezuela amounted to 18% of the country’s annual GDP, and Ecuador received Chinese loans exceeding 10% of its GDP.
Chinese lending to Brazil was closer to 1% of GDP, while lending to Mexico was comparatively trivial.
But actual disbursements may have fallen short of the original plans, meaning that these countries’ debts to China are lower than estimated.
Alternatively – and more likely – the data may not include some projects, lenders, or borrowers, meaning that the debts could be much higher.
Moreover, other forms of borrowing – such as trade finance, which is skewed toward shorter maturities – are not included in these figures.
Currency-swap agreements, which have been important for Brazil and Argentina, must also be added to the list.
In short, though emerging economies’ debts seem largely moderate by historic standards, it seems likely that they are being underestimated, perhaps by a large margin.
If so, the magnitude of the ongoing reversal in capital flows that emerging economies are experiencing may be larger than is generally believed – potentially large enough to trigger a crisis.
In this context, keeping track of opaque and evolving financial linkages is more important than ever.
LONDON – Almost a decade ago, facing a near-collapse of the financial system and the risk of a depression, the world needed a new form of leadership to navigate and restore confidence in the global economy.
That’s why, in 2009, at his first global summit as US president, Barack Obama joined then-British Prime Minister Gordon Brown to spearhead the G20’s upgrade, making it the world’s preeminent economic forum.
What they created helped solve one immediate problem, but it let linger another global challenge.
With the Obama-Brown upgrade, the G20 – comprising 19 of the world’s largest advanced and emerging economies, plus the European Union – took over the role played by the G7 (Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, and the US).
Obama and Brown knew that a group that did not include rising economic powers, like China and India, could not propose effective solutions to the global economy’s biggest problems.
Whatever one thinks of the G20 – and it is by no means perfect – this more inclusive grouping helped to overcome the consequences of the 2008 global financial crisis.
With an expanded coterie of world leaders taking charge, jittery financial markets stabilized, and the G20 then helped launch, and sustain, a global economic stimulus, led by China, which reversed the downward spiral.
Today, the G20, now meeting in Hamburg for its annual summit, must confront the challenge of inequality.
With the world’s richest 1% now owning 40% of its assets, the benefits of growth are not being shared in a way that is either economically efficient or politically sustainable.
This crisis had been building for many decades, but it accelerated sharply after the global financial meltdown that the G20 helped stem.
As a result, disillusioned and disaffected voters in advanced economies are challenging established political parties to find solutions or cede power, while millions of people from poor countries, unable to envision a future at home, are risking their lives by crossing deserts and seas in search of economic opportunity.
It is up to the G20 to deal with the global inequality crisis with the same urgency it showed during the Great Recession of 2008-2009.
Just as Obama and Brown led the way then, German Chancellor Angela Merkel must respond purposefully and powerfully to the widening divide between rich and poor, which has become an acute danger to the world economy, and to social cohesion and political stability.
The G20, which Germany now leads, could take many steps to address the crisis of inequality, but three are most important.
First, the G20 needs to get serious about accelerating work on the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals.
The SDGs set a bold but achievable agenda for addressing poverty, reducing inequality, improving education and health, and protecting the planet.
But almost two years after their launch, a business-as-usual approach prevails in most countries, and accountability has been reduced to exercises in collecting data.
The G20 countries, which collectively account for most of the world’s population and resources, should lead by translating the SDGs into national policies, and by harnessing government budgets and their private sectors to drive implementation.
Second, the G20 must crack down on economic abuses that weaken states and markets, and erode public trust.
Tax avoidance by big corporations and wealthy individuals, which by some estimates cost poor countries $200 billion a year, is a case in point.
Many business leaders do understand that the future of the world economy, and their own companies, depends on reducing poverty, and that this is becomes harder to achieve as inequality widens.
But to tackle a crisis of this scale, the entire business community must be on board.
Finally, the G20 should lead the way toward giving every child access to quality education by 2030.
For example, teaching all students in poor countries to read could help pull more than 170 million people out of poverty, equal to a 12% decline in the number of poor people worldwide.
But this would require a dramatic increase in education spending, including more funding for existing programs, like Education Cannot Wait, which supports the continuation of schooling for children in disaster areas, and the Global Partnership for Education, which provides grants to support education in countries with the most need.
It must also include investment in proposed initiatives, like the International Finance Facility for Education, which aims to bring public and private donors together to increase global education financing by more than $10 billion dollars a year.
The G20 is still the world’s leading forum when it comes to the global economy.
Now is the time for the G20 to step up again, and to act with genuine resolve, to address the global inequality crisis.
LONDON – In February, Forbes published its first-ever list of cryptocurrencies’ richest people.
The top ten were each worth around $1 billion, while the wealthiest – an American blockchain innovator named Chris Larsen – was estimated to be worth $8 billion.
According to the magazine’s editor, the best way to pull digital currencies out from the shadows and “into the adolescence of a legitimate asset class” is to shine a light on the beneficiaries.
Once that happens, the newly famous cryptocurrency billionaires, like so many before them, will want to be seen to be doing good, not just doing well.
And, one of the best philanthropic causes to support is health care in developing countries.
A few years ago, when I was working as a private health-care strategy consultant, I advised high-net-worth individuals and their companies in South Sudan, the Gambia, and Tanzania on the best ways to give back to the communities where their businesses operated.
These investors – nearly all of whom had profited handsomely from the oil industry – faced intense social pressure to use their wealth for humanitarian causes.
Based partly on my advice, they began investing tens of millions of dollars to improve health-care infrastructure.
Initial allocations were modest; but, over time, their donations helped fund health-care reforms elsewhere in Africa.
While these investments were a small fraction of the overall need, the impact on health outcomes has been significant.
The wealthiest cryptocurrency holders could easily pick up where the oil sector’s richest left off.
And, for those on the Forbes list looking for ideas about how to engage in health-care-related philanthropy, here are four options:
This could be accomplished by joining Bill Gates, Mark Zuckerberg, Elon Musk, and many others who have donated at least half of their personal wealth to social causes, including global health.
Or their pledges could be more in line with those of the global soccer stars who have vowed to give at least 1% of their salaries to charity.
Second, advocate for a transaction tax on digital-currency trading, and push to use the revenue to finance health-care projects in the developing world.
Such a tax could be modeled on the so-called Robin Hood Tax under consideration in the United Kingdom, which would place a tiny tariff on financial transactions to help pay for poverty-alleviation programs and climate-change initiatives.
In many poor countries, health-care systems suffer from insecure patient records, a loophole that cryptocurrency technologies could help close.
Investments in digital solutions would also help improve health outcomes and streamline data-based decision-making.
And, finally, fund projects that improve the management of health-care finances.
Cryptocurrency billionaires owe their fortunes to the security of their transactions; health care in the developing world, which is plagued by high levels of institutionalized corruption, could benefit from similar controls.
Simply put, there is no better place to direct cryptocurrency philanthropy than health-care projects in the Global South, where digital-currency trading is expanding faster than anywhere else.
In Venezuela, where the national currency is in freefall, bitcoin has become the leading “parallel currency” to pay for basic goods and services – including medical bills.
In East Africa, local innovators have turned to cryptocurrency systems such as BitPesa to support cross-border transactions.
Even the United Nations World Food Programme has used cryptocurrency to send money to refugees in Jordan.
To be sure, cryptocurrencies’ nouveau riche are not obligated to fund social causes with their wealth; it’s their money, after all.
In January, Laurence Fink, the chief executive of the $6 trillion investment firm BlackRock, told business leaders that if they wanted his continued support, they must do more than generate profits; they must also serve a “social purpose” by making “a positive contribution to society.”
Cryptocurrencies’ richest people would be in good company if they pledged to use a portion of their wealth to improve the lives of the less fortunate.
And, in my experience, there is no better way to do the most good with wealth than by spending it on health care in the developing world.
SANTIAGO/SAO PAULO – In December, world leaders will meet in Paris for the United Nations Climate Change Conference, which is expected to produce a new agreement to tackle global warming.
But, in the run-up to the conference, heads of state and ministers will meet at various other related events.
Having attended countless summits, we can attest that, if these other meetings are correctly prepared, and heads of state engage meaningfully in them, the prospects of success in Paris could be improved.
One such meeting in particular could be decisive: the June 10-11 bi-annual summit in Brussels between the European Union and the Community of Latin America and the Caribbean States (CELAC).
Efforts by Europe and Latin America and the Caribbean have set the groundwork for the world’s strongest bi-regional partnership on climate change.
Leaders in both regions have declared their commitment to holding the rise in global temperature to below 2º Celsius and to achieving legally binding outcomes in Paris.
The EU and CELAC heads of state can – and should – forge a close alliance and capitalize on favorable political conditions to advance a progressive climate agenda, one that mandates their negotiators to push for a fair, equitable, and ambitious agreement in December.
Together, the two regions represent nearly a third of the 195 parties that have signed the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, and account for roughly 20% of global greenhouse-gas emissions.
Given soaring climate-related economic costs in Europe and Latin America, both sides have much to gain (and save) from a global regime that significantly reduces emissions and strengthens resilience to climate risks.
Latin America and the Caribbean are taking concerted action to help bringing down global emissions and could do much more with funding and technology transfers from developed countries.
Brazil, for example, has drastically reduced deforestation in the Amazon – a major contribution.
Chile is on track to reach its goal of producing 20% of its electricity from renewable sources by 2025.
And in 2012, Mexico enacted a climate-change law that aims to reduce emissions by 30% below their business-as-usual level by 2020, and by 50% by 2050.
For its part, the EU is offering the strongest pledge yet for the Paris agreement: a reduction in domestic greenhouse-gas emissions by at least 40%, relative to their level in 1990, by 2030.
This is in line with the EU’s long-term goal of reducing emissions by 80-95% (again, relative to the 1990 level) by 2050.
The EU-CELAC summit can also benefit from diplomatic efforts within CELAC, which includes all of the region’s 33 countries.
A regional effort led by Brazil and Chile is promoting dialogue among CELAC countries to build trust, with the goal of identifying common positions for the UN climate negotiations.
CELAC has emphasized that a new global climate-change deal should treat adaptation and mitigation in a balanced manner.
In keeping with its commitment to the 2º C cap on the rise in global temperature, CELAC not only supports a legally binding agreement, but also calls for wealthy countries to meet their promises to provide developing countries with $100 billion per year in climate finance by 2020.
Wealthy countries that have not complied with the emissions-reduction commitments enshrined in the 1997 Kyoto Protocol owe this debt to the planet.
CELAC seeks rules to ensure the transparency and verification of countries’ climate actions, and calls on developed countries to increase their technology transfer and capacity-building efforts to support its member countries.
Latin American and the Caribbean countries can also use the upcoming summit in Brussels to reassure the EU that it is a valued partner.
It can call on Europe to provide greater predictability of financial flows and alignment on climate and development objectives, especially to reduce inequality and poverty, boost clean energy, and build sustainable urban transport and other infrastructure.
Following the difficult climate negotiations in Copenhagen in 2009, we understand why some European leaders may be lowering expectations for the Paris talks.
They are understandably reluctant to expend too much political capital by calling for a far-reaching deal.
But, at a time when concern about global warming among citizens in both regions is growing, this is no time for indecisiveness.
European leaders should boldly show that they are committed to an ambitious outcome in Paris, and that Europe will enhance its support of CELAC climate actions.
The Inter-American Development Bank estimates that CELAC can more than meet its future energy needs through renewable energy sources, including solar, wind, and geothermal.
Indeed, such resources are sufficient to cover projected 2050 electricity needs 22 times over.
The EU can play a leading role in promoting renewable energy cooperation, in part by transferring technology that is adapted to our tropical conditions, which would support CELAC countries’ efforts to reduce emissions and pollution, increase their resilience to climate change, and create jobs.
Progress in Brussels next week would increase CELAC countries’ confidence, thereby encouraging them to offer the strongest-possible commitments – known technically as “intended nationally determined contributions” – in Paris.
More generally, a successful meeting in Brussels could help bring all sides closer together on thorny issues, such as the scale and scope of efforts that countries at different levels of development should make to address climate change.
By forming an ambitious alliance – which could be enlarged to include other groups, such as the Alliance of Small Island States and the Least-Developed Countries group – EU and CELAC heads of state can contribute to setting the course that the world must follow to create a low-carbon, sustainable, and resilient future.
We urge them to take the necessary steps in Brussels next week to achieve that goal.
NEW DELHI – On July 1, an eerie silence descended over many of India’s teeming marketplaces.
At midnight, a new national goods and services tax (GST) had come into effect at a glittering ceremony in India’s parliament.
It was hailed as the biggest tax reform since independence, but business owners were so uncertain about how it would affect the prices of their wares that many shuttered their businesses for the day.
Many (including me) have long advocated a national GST, which has the potential to unify India’s national market, making the economy more transparent, digitized, and efficient.
Its introduction was delayed for a decade by the now-ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), including Prime Minister Narendra Modi, who, as Chief Minister of Gujarat, argued that it would encroach on states’ rights and rob them of revenue.
But, proving the aphorism that where you stand depends on where you sit, Modi changed his tune when he moved to Delhi.
And now, over three years after taking power, he has implemented the GST that he once derided.
Indeed, much like Modi’s disastrous demonetization gamble just eight months ago – which entailed the abrupt withdrawal of all large-denomination banknotes from circulation – his GST has proved both messy and disruptive.
In fact, the GST Modi has introduced seems to replace the world’s most complex and fragmented system of indirect taxation with the world’s most complex unified indirect tax.
Instead of one GST rate, as in most countries, India will have four: 5%, 12%, 18%, and 28%, plus a 0% rate for items like food grains, cereal, and fresh milk, and a luxury tax (43% and more) on expensive cars and other high-end consumer items.
(India imports more gold than any other country in the world, and the government seems anxious not to tax it so heavily that smuggling increases.)
With seven separate rates, the GST has certainly not fulfilled the goal of “one nation, one tax.”
Some 1,200 items and almost every imaginable service were slotted into a rate category, though not before being shifted around in response to popular opposition (for example, to high taxes on previously exempted goods used by the disabled).
Milk products, for example, may fit into four different tax rates; generic flour will not be taxed, but branded flour will be taxed at 5%.
Not surprisingly, the result has been widespread confusion about which tax rates apply to what.
Complicating matters further, there are significant omissions, because the Modi government yielded to the states’ demands to retain some taxation powers on high-yielding sources of revenue.
Notable exclusions are real estate and alcohol – notorious sources of black money, the eradication of which is supposed to be a major objective of the Modi government – as well as petroleum products (currently taxed at about 45%), electricity, and communications tariffs.
It is undoubtedly a relief that the farrago of central and state sales taxes that had previously bedeviled Indian businesses will be replaced by the GST.
But the GST retains enough complexity that it is likely to lead to evasion, arbitrage, and even bribery of tax officials.
The GST is also likely to trigger a flood of litigation about which tax brackets companies fall into and how their goods should be categorized.
Even before the GST was rolled out, the Indian judicial system was choked by indirect tax appeals, tying down some $23 billion in tax revenue.
With its judicial system already heavily backlogged – a staggering 24 million cases are pending – more tax-related lawsuits are the last thing India needs.
The regime also requires firms to file at least three online tax returns per month (37 per year) into the GST Network (GSTN), the GST’s formidable technical backbone.
But most small business owners, as well as traders and shopkeepers, are not computer-enabled, and now have to scramble to acquire the needed computer access and literacy.
Moreover, the haste with which the GST was rolled out raises legitimate concerns about whether the software has been tested adequately and will be able to handle the intended 3-5 billion invoices per month.
The confusing tax rates, excessive documentation, and anxiety over the implementation of compliance requirements has prompted fears that the GST will damage people’s livelihoods.
The self-employed informal sector, a major contributor to India’s economy, was already badly hurt by demonetization just a few months ago.
GST could turn out to be a second body blow, this time potentially fatal.
But that would have required the central government to work with states to develop a rational and simpler system, with the rate capped, as the opposition Congress party demanded, at 18%, rather than the ultra-high 28% the BJP chose (for as many as 30% of all items, no less).
It also would have required Modi’s government to test the GSTN more thoroughly before implementing it, and to give small and medium-size businesses, multi-state businesses, and consumers time to familiarize themselves with the task of filing three returns each month.
Tax inspectors should have been required to undergo more thorough training, spending time with businesses and filing test returns themselves.
And petroleum products, electricity, and real estate should have been included in the GST scheme.
Finance Minister Arun Jaitley hailed both demonetization and the GST as “tectonic policy initiatives” that would lead to “growth, competitiveness, indirect tax simplification, and greater transparency.”
But, as will likely become apparent within this fiscal year, disorderly and rushed measures are not the way to achieve them.
NEW YORK – The European Union needs to accept responsibility for the lack of a common asylum policy, which has transformed this year’s growing influx of refugees from a manageable problem into yet another political crisis.
Each member state has selfishly focused on its own interests, often acting against the interests of others.
This precipitated panic among asylum seekers, the general public, and the authorities responsible for law and order.
The EU needs a comprehensive plan to respond to the crisis, one that reasserts effective governance over the flows of asylum-seekers so that they take place in a safe, orderly way, and at a pace that reflects Europe’s capacity to absorb them.
It is less disruptive and much less expensive to maintain potential asylum-seekers in or close to their present location.
As the origin of the current crisis is Syria, the fate of the Syrian population has to be the first priority.
Similarly, a European plan must be accompanied by a global response, under the authority of the United Nations and involving its member states.
This would distribute the burden of the Syrian crisis over a larger number of states, while also establishing global standards for dealing with the problems of forced migration more generally.
First, the EU has to accept at least a million asylum-seekers annually for the foreseeable future.
And, to do that, it must share the burden fairly – a principle that a qualified majority finally established at last Wednesday’s summit.
The EU should provide €15,000 ($16,800) per asylum-seeker for each of the first two years to help cover housing, health care, and education costs – and to make accepting refugees more appealing to member states.
It can raise these funds by issuing long-term bonds using its largely untapped AAA borrowing capacity, which will have the added benefit of providing a justified fiscal stimulus to the European economy.
It is equally important to allow both states and asylum-seekers to express their preferences, using the least possible coercion.
Placing refugees where they want to go – and where they are wanted – is a sine qua non of success.
Second, the EU must lead the global effort to provide adequate funding to Lebanon, Jordan, and Turkey to support the four million refugees currently living in those countries.
Thus far, only a fraction of the funding needed for even basic care has been raised.
If education, training, and other essential needs are included, the annual costs are at least €5,000 per refugee, or €20 billion.
EU aid today to Turkey, though doubled last week, still amounts to just €1 billion.
In addition, the EU also should help create special economic zones with preferred trade status in the region, including in Tunisia and Morocco, to attract investment and generate jobs for both locals and refugees.
The EU would need to make an annual commitment to frontline countries of at least €8-10 billion, with the balance coming from the United States and the rest of the world.
This could be added to the amount of long-term bonds issued to support asylum-seekers in Europe.
Third, the EU must immediately start building a single EU Asylum and Migration Agency and eventually a single EU Border Guard.
The current patchwork of 28 separate asylum systems does not work: it is expensive, inefficient, and produces wildly inconsistent results in determining who qualifies for asylum.
The new agency would gradually streamline procedures; establish common rules for employment and entrepreneurship, as well as consistent benefits; and develop an effective, rights-respecting return policy for migrants who do not qualify for asylum.
Fourth, safe channels must be established for asylum-seekers, starting with getting them from Greece and Italy to their destination countries.
The next logical step is to extend safe avenues to the frontline region, thereby reducing the number of migrants who make the dangerous Mediterranean crossing.
If asylum-seekers have a reasonable chance of ultimately reaching Europe, they are far more likely to stay where they are.
This will require negotiating with frontline countries, in cooperation with the UN Refugee Agency, to establish processing centers there – with Turkey as the priority.
The operational and financial arrangements developed by the EU should be used to establish global standards for the treatment of asylum-seekers and migrants.
Finally, to absorb and integrate more than a million asylum seekers and migrants a year, the EU needs to mobilize the private sector – NGOs, church groups, and businesses – to act as sponsors.
This will require not only sufficient funding, but also the human and IT capacity to match migrants and sponsors.
The exodus from war-torn Syria should never have become a crisis.
It was long in the making, easy to foresee, and eminently manageable by Europe and the international community.
Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has now also produced a six-point plan to address the crisis.
But his plan, which subordinates the human rights of asylum-seekers and migrants to the security of borders, threatens to divide and destroy the EU by renouncing the values on which it was built and violating the laws that are supposed to govern it.
The EU must respond with a genuinely European asylum policy that will put an end to the panic and the unnecessary human suffering.
PRAGUE - Genuine civil society is the truest fundamental of democracy, a truth often forgotten in the heat of election campaigns.
Although Communism could, every now and then, coexist with private ownership, sometimes with private enterprise, it could never coexist with civil society.
So the most fateful attack that accompanied the installation of Communist power everywhere was an attack on civil society.
The freedom of speech that Communism suppressed overnight could, on its fall, be restored overnight.
Restoration of civil society – the many parallel and mutually complementary ways in which citizens participate in public life – has been far more complicated.
The reason is self-evident: civil society is an intricately structured, very fragile, sometimes even mysterious organism that grew over decades, if not centuries.
After years of virtual non-existence, civil society, therefore cannot be restored from above, or by legal fiat.
Its three pillars – private, voluntary associations, decentralization of the state, delegation political power to independent entities – can only be rebuilt patiently.
In the ten years of postcommunist transition our new political elites take either an apathetic stance towards rebuilding civil society or actively oppose it.
As soon as these elites gained power, they became unwilling to surrender any of the state authority they inherited.
Many democratic, even anti-Communist politicians are now, paradoxically, defending the overblown governmental powers that are relics of the Communist era.
This is why many schools, hospitals, cultural institutions and other establishments remain governed by centralized administrations, although they could have transformed themselves into organizations that the state would watch from a distance or support through transparent procedures.
Debate on decentralization of the state has been dragging on for nine years without any government department displaying the willingness to transfer powers to regions or to municipalities without a fight.
This is why taxation in our country remains excessive: the state has to pay for a thousand things which it would not have to pay if an advanced civil society existed, because citizens would pay for them directly.
If some politicians seek ideological excuses for their unwillingness to reduce state power, they mostly argue the following: "People have chosen us in an election; it is their will that we rule.
Social redistribution of resources is a task for the state, and the central state's responsibility in this field must not be diffused.
Attempts to build or to support any parallel structures not controlled from the center casts doubt on parliamentary democracy itself."
Faith in civil society, indeed, is still interpreted by many as leftism, anarchism or syndicalism; someone has even called it proto-fascism.
At the root of the argument that civil society is an attack on the political system, we find the well known unwillingness to share power.
It is as if the parties are saying: "Governing is our business, so choose between us, but nothing more."
Nonsense: political parties, democratic institutions, work well only when they draw strength and inspiration from a developed, pluralist civic environment and are exposed to criticism from that environment.
It is not the intention of civil society to circumvent parliament or political parties: it aims to enable them to work to the best of their ability.
Without a life-giving background in the form of a diversely structured civil society, political parties as well as political institutions wither, lose inventiveness, and are eventually reduced to dull, closed groups of political professionals.
Civil society generates genuine pluralism, and pluralism – leading to competition – produces quality.
The more different initiatives are allowed to operate, the greater is the chance that the best and most inventive ones will triumph.
To rely solely on the capacities of central state authorities or of central political bodies to always decide what needs to be done and how, equates power with truth, the most dangerous political conceit of this century.
Moreover, the more stratified civil society becomes, the more it thrives, the more stable is domestic politics.
Civil society protects citizens from being excessively affected by changes at the center of political power.
It absorbs, at lower levels, some of the effects of such change, even disposes of them.
In this way, it actually facilitates political change so that a change of government does not seem a windstorm leaving nothing in its place.
Where civil society is not sufficiently developed every problem filters up to the center of power.
But the more power is left at the center the more favorable are the conditions for such forces to gain control over the country.
Communists knew this very well; it is why they even manipulated associations of bee-keepers.
You need not be an economist to discover that civil society also pays its way.
When things are paid by the state budget, more money must be collected in taxes and substantial sums are consumed by such transfers.
In a system that allows tax deductions for charitable giving, beneficial initiatives get more money than they would get if the same amounts were spent by the state.
The most important aspects of civil society is yet another thing – it enables people to realize themselves.
They are also – and this may be their innermost quality – creatures who want to be with others, who yearn for various forms of coexistence and cooperation, who want to influence what happens around them.
Civil society is one of the key ways in which our human nature can be exercised in its entirety.
The enemies of civil society know this; it animates their opposition to it.
WASHINGTON, DC – The US-South Korea alliance has been one of the most dramatic geopolitical success stories of the post-war years.
But US President Donald Trump now seems determined to do away with the economic and strategic benefits of that longstanding relationship.
In the 1950s, a war-ravaged South Korea had Asia’s third-lowest per capita income, highest inflation, and slowest rate of growth.
But the authorities implemented far-reaching reforms in the early 1960s, and, over the next three decades, it became an industrial powerhouse with a standard of living that qualified it for membership in the OECD, the club of rich countries.
Much of this success was due to a shift from foreign-aid dependency to export-led growth.
In the mid-2000s, South Korea and the United States began exploring closer trade ties, and in March 2012, the Korean-United States Free Trade Agreement entered into force.
Yet, after taking office, Trump denounced it as a “horrible deal,” and insisted that it be renegotiated.
More recently, Trump announced import tariffs of 25% on steel and 10% on aluminum, and indicated that exemptions would be granted to US trade partners on a case-by-case basis.
Putting aside Trump’s additional announcements of trade actions targeting China, tariffs on steel and aluminum would undoubtedly have negative effects on the US economy.
A few US steel and aluminum jobs might be saved, but far more would be lost in industries using those metals as inputs, which employ ten times more workers.
The Trump administration’s stated objective in pursuing protectionist policies is to reduce the US trade deficit.
But a current-account deficit (the trade deficit plus the services balance) reflects the difference between saving and investment.
Thus, reducing it would require macroeconomic policies to reduce domestic expenditures and increase domestic savings.
A few weeks after unveiling the tariffs, the Trump administration announced that it had “renegotiated” the KORUS.
In exchange for an exemption from the tariffs, South Korea agreed to reduce its steel exports to the US to 70% of 2015-17 levels, postpone a phase-out of the 25% US tariff on small trucks for 20 years (from 2021), and increase its annual limit on US-made automobile imports from 25,000 to 50,000.
In fact, imported cars represent just 15% of domestic car sales, with US imports amounting to just 1%.
Still, it is clear that the South Koreans were forced to accede to these changes, even though they negotiated the KORUS in good faith and have stuck to its terms.
Trump’s “renegotiation” gave South Korea a non-choice between limiting its annual steel exports to the US and facing a punishing 25% tariff on all of its steel exports.
As for the US, the KORUS revisions mean that foreign exporters of goods made with steel will gain a competitive advantage over domestic producers, who will have to pay more for their steel.
As a result, some US producers will move overseas, others will raise prices and lose market share, and still others will simply go out of business.
Moreover, both countries will face the additional bureaucratic burden of managing their steel trade.
The South Korean government will need to allocate quotas among its steel producers; and US customs officials will have to check all steel imports from South Korea to ensure that they are within the 70% limit and were not transshipped.
US customs officials will also have to inspect all other shipments from other countries to determine which are exempt and which are subject to the 25% tariff.
According to The Economist, the Trump administration expects to spend 24,000 worker hours processing 4,500 exemption requests.
And that does not even include the paperwork necessary for determining the origin and exemption status of each shipment to the US indefinitely into the future.
This is precisely the kind of managed and discriminatory trade arrangement that the US did so much to eliminate over the past half-century.
If a US president can so easily force one-sided amendments to settled agreements, why should any country bother negotiating with the US?
South Korean leaders spent a lot of domestic political capital negotiating the KORUS, and they were willing to do that because they trusted the US to act in good faith.
They now find themselves having agreed to a contract in which the other party forced them to accept terms that were never negotiated.
For US steel-exporting allies like South Korea and Japan, the fact that the Trump administration is justifying its tariffs in the name of “national security” adds insult to injury.
After all, the Trump administration recently declared North Korea to be America’s top strategic threat, and it is now working with the South Korean government to hold a summit with North Korea’s leader this May.
If Trump really does care about national security or US competitiveness, then his actions are utterly incomprehensible.
They will lead to severe costs for the US economy and the rules-based multilateral trade system, and to the loss of US credibility long after he is gone.
Over the past 60 years, nuclear physics has been one obvious example of this truth.
Today, enterprising firms offer, for a fee, to tell you about your genes.
You might, for example, have extra checkups to detect early signs of the diseases that you are most at risk of contracting, or you could alter your diet to reduce that risk.
If your chances of a long lifespan are not good, you might buy more life insurance, or even retire early to have enough time to do what you always wanted to do.
Defenders of privacy have worked, with some success, to prevent insurance companies from requiring genetic testing before issuing life insurance.
But if individuals can do tests from which insurance companies are barred, and if those who receive adverse genetic information then buy additional life insurance without disclosing the tests that they have taken, they are cheating other holders of life insurance.
Premiums will have to increase to cover the losses, and those with a good genetic prognosis may opt out of life insurance to avoid subsidizing the cheats, driving premiums higher still.
The United States Government Accountability Office sent identical genetic samples to several of the testing companies, and got widely varying, and mostly useless, advice.
In developed countries, the routine testing of older pregnant women, combined with the availability of abortion, has significantly reduced the incidence of conditions like Down syndrome.
In some regions of India and China where couples are anxious to have a son, selective abortion has been the ultimate form of sexism, and has been practiced to such an extent that a generation is coming of age in which males face a shortage of female partners.
For several years, some couples at risk of passing a genetic disease on to their children have used in vitro fertilization, producing several embryos that can be tested for the faulty gene and implanting in the woman’s uterus only those without it.
Now couples are using this technique to avoid passing on genes that imply a significantly elevated risk of developing certain forms of cancer.
Since everyone carries some adverse genes, there is no clear line between selecting against a child with above-average risks of contracting a disease and selecting for a child with unusually rosy health prospects.
For many parents, nothing is more important than giving their child the best possible start in life.
They buy expensive toys to maximize their child’s learning potential and spend much more on private schools or after school tutoring in the hope that he or she will excel on the tests that determine entry to elite universities.
It may not be long before we can identify genes that improve the odds of success in this quest.
Many will condemn this as a resurgence of “eugenics,” the view, especially popular in the early twentieth century, that hereditary traits should be improved through active intervention.
So it is, in a way, and in the hands of authoritarian regimes, genetic selection could resemble the evils of earlier forms of eugenics, with their advocacy of odious, pseudoscientific official policies, particularly concerning “racial hygiene.”
In liberal, market driven societies, however, eugenics will not be coercively imposed by the state for the collective good.
Instead, it will be the outcome of parental choice and the workings of the free market.
If it leads to healthier, smarter people with better problem-solving abilities, that will be a good thing.
But even if parents make choices that are good for their children, there could be perils as well as blessings.
In the case of sex selection, it is easy to see that couples who independently choose the best for their own child can produce an outcome that makes all their children worse off than they would have been if no one could select the sex of their child.
Since above-average height correlates with above-average income, and there is a clearly a genetic component to height, it is not fanciful to imagine couples choosing to have taller children.
The outcome could be a genetic “arms race” that leads to taller and taller children, with significant environmental costs in the additional consumption required to fuel larger human beings.
The most alarming implication of this mode of genetic selection, however, is that only the rich will be able to afford it.
The gap between rich and poor, already a challenge to our ideas of social justice, will become a chasm that mere equality of opportunity will be powerless to bridge.
But avoiding this outcome will not be easy, for it will require that selection for genetic enhancement is either available to no one or accessible to everyone.
The first option would require coercion, and – since countries will not accept that others should gain a competitive edge – an international agreement to forego the benefits that genetic enhancement can bring.
The second option, universal access, would require an unprecedented level of social assistance for the poor, and extraordinarily difficult decisions about what to subsidize.
PARIS – Is football (soccer) just a mirror that reflects the collective emotions of a country?
Or should it instead be seen as a magnifying glass, if not sometimes a distorting mirror, that reveals on the playing field the frustrations, fears, ambition, or hope of a nation?
It would be tempting to attribute to football a “mapping” of the emotional state of the world.
Asia is doing less well in the World Cup than it is doing in economic terms, yet it is definitely progressing, compensating for the current lack of individual talent by the greater collective discipline shown by its teams.
By contrast, in terms of creativity, Latin American flair shines well beyond Brazil and its confirmed emerging-power status in the world to encompass countries such as Argentina, Uruguay, and even Chile.
Africa, despite some rare individual national successes, continues to underperform, even with the World Cup in its backyard.
As a Frenchman who watched with a mixture of sadness and humiliation the behavior of the French national team, on and off the field (happily, the torture is over), the image in the mirror makes a lot of sense.
But can one go so far as to say that a depressed country can produce only a depressed team?
There are many countries with social and economic conditions that are equal to or worse than France’s, yet their national teams are currently shining on the field.
One could almost speak of an inverse relationship between a country’s confidence and that of its World Cup football team.
The catastrophic performance of France’s team in South Africa may well reinforce the nation’s depression.
French citizens badly needed a furlough, if only for a month, from the socio-economic reality of their country.
The French team’s performance may reflect the mood of the country, but the failure of France’s international stars to jell reflected, above all, a total absence of leadership at the helm.
Too much money, too little respect for the honor of wearing the team shirt – the unraveling of “Les Bleus” has not been an event but a process, the chronicle of a disaster foretold, to quote Roselyne Bachelot, France’s minister of health and sport.
In reality, what applies to France can also be said of many other teams, such as Italy.
But nowhere is the contrast between the recent glorious past and the miserable present as spectacular as it is in France.
In the land of Moliere, failure, like success, must be theatrical.
In 1998, France could celebrate the multicolor, multi-ethnic victory of “Les Bleus.”
In 2010, France has the “blues,” and some people are starting to see, through the failure of the national team, the limits of the French model of integration.
“We” Frenchmen were so proud in 1998 of watching the gigantic, iconic image of Zinedine Zidane (the French captain, who is of Algerian descent) being projected onto the Arc de Triomphe on the Champs-Elysees.
“We” French were not only on top of the world, we were overcome by a sense of pride, probably similar to what many Americans felt after Barack Obama’s presidential victory.
Liberty, Equality, Fraternity seemed very real as the values of our Republic.
In 2010, “The rise and fall of Les Bleus” can be interpreted as an accelerated version of Gibbon’s study of the decline of the Roman Empire.
A weak emperor (the president of the French Football Federation) chose an incompetent general (the coach Raymond Domenech), who failed to inspire mercenaries (the players) or to instill in them a sense of collective sacrifice and duty.
But there is a study much more useful than Gibbon’s analysis of Rome for understanding what happened to France’s team: Marc Bloch’s masterful examination of France’s collapse in 1940, A Strange Defeat.
Like the French army in the spring of 1940, the French team’s strategy and technique were outmoded.
If one substitutes war for soccer, the comparison that comes to mind is that of the aging French military establishment, behind the Maginot Line in 1940, unable to confront General Heinz Guderian’s masterful command of blitzkrieg tank attacks.
Is France just an extreme version of Europe’s traditional “Big Powers” predicament?
In Europe, at least when it comes to soccer, “small is beautiful,” and, as a fan, it is much better to be Dutch, Portuguese, or Slovak, than Italian, English, or, of course, French.
Even Spain and Germany, despite qualifying for the next round, have started to scare theirs fans with mixed results.
The fall of Milosevic does not cure the political woes of the Balkans; indeed, it raises their urgency.
It was in Yugoslavia that Vojislav Kostunica was elected president, but his mandate comes solely from support in Serbia.
Montenegro, Serbia’s junior partner in the Yugoslav federation, mostly boycotted the election while Albanians in Kosovo ignored them.
Yet it was Yugoslavia, whose foundations are unstable, that was recently admitted to the UN.
A host of problems remain unresolved: relations between Serbia and Montenegro and the status of Kosovo (not to mention Serbia’s northern province of Vojvodina).
Any resolution – any suggestion of change – will engender new conflicts because of conflicting claims of sovereignty.
However tempting it may be to solve the puzzle by drawing new borders or establishing new entities, this conundrum cannot be resolved in terms of sovereignty.
A new approach is needed: the European Union should use the prospect of European integration as the way to promote regional integration.
The EU could act as a magnet to bring the region closer together by bringing the region as a whole closer to Europe.
This idea has great appeal to people in the region, but only the EU can make it happen.
After NATO intervention in Kosovo, European leaders made this approach the cornerstone of their vision for the Balkans.
It was enshrined in the Stability Pact signed at the Sarajevo Summit of July, 1999.
But the Stability Pact is merely a shell – it needs to be filled with content.
The time to do so is at the Zagreb Conference on November 24 called by France as the current EU president.
The European Union should now propose a three-point plan for the Balkans:
Once all these countries reach agreement with the EU there would automatically be free trade throughout the Balkans.
But from the start, the EU should give a signal by unilaterally opening its border to imports from the region.
This cannot endanger any EU interests as the countries at issue now have far less than 1% of the EU market.
$ a regional VAT to replace the lost customs revenues should be established within two years.
Differences in indirect taxes such as VAT pose another way in which borders become obstacles to trade.
Regional VAT rates might be increased slightly if expenditure restraint is not sufficient to offset the loss of tariff revenues due to the customs union.
$ Temporary budgetary support on a declining scale for three years, subject to EU supervision over budgetary expenditures.
Because it will take time to collect revenues from the regional VAT, the EU should provide financial help during the transition.
The area covered by this plan would include Bulgaria, Croatia and Albania as well as Serbia, Bosnia, Macedonia, Montenegro and Kosovo.
Bulgaria and Croatia could be persuaded to participate provided it would not interfere with their candidacy for EU membership.
Depending on the country, there could be more or less budgetary support.
(Bulgaria, for example, might not need compensation since to a great extent it has already eliminated tariffs).
In comparison to the cost of military intervention and peacekeeping, the financial costs here are ridiculously low.
I estimate that Euro 750 million in the first year, Euro 500 million in the second year and Euro 250 million in the third year would do the trick.
These figures are well within range of pledges already made by the EU for the Stability Pact and they could be easily accommodated within the confines of the Berlin Accord on the EU budget for 2000-2005 if EU member states agree to a reallocation of unspent funds.
Budgetary support in the context of a Customs Union would be a more effective way to disburse EU funds than conventional methods.
It would remove two major sources of corruption and inefficiency: the customs service and the misuse of public funds in general.
It would create a trade area large enough to generate both local and foreign investment.
The Deutsche Mark, already widely used in the region, now functions as the de facto common currency.
Any ban on its use should be lifted to make borders irrelevant for trade and investment.
Improved economic prospects and the strengthening of institutions, in turn, would have a positive impact on the political climate throughout the Balkans.
Success in peacefully removing a tyrant has set in motion a process of national renewal.
The population, frustrated by ever deepening impoverishment and isolation, is beginning to question what happened over the past decade in Serbia.
People are asking about crimes committed by the Milosevic regime against Serbs.
They must begin to come to terms with the crimes committed against others - in Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo.
Once that process is underway, many problems that now seem intractable will be resolved more easily.
Kostunica’s election as President of Yugoslavia amounts to an incomplete revolution: many of the old guard are still in place.
Milosevic was overthrown in the hope of ending Serbia’s isolation.
If the French Presidency fails to seize the moment in Zagreb, an historic opportunity will be lost.
SAN FRANCISCO – Rwanda has achieved some of the most dramatic gains in health and poverty-reduction in the world.
This small, landlocked African country (the size of Massachusetts, but with twice the population) has developed a primary health-care system with near-universal access to clinical care and insurance.
Rwanda has reduced both economic and health-care inequality, and demonstrates how “health equity” helps to build strong societies.
The secret to Rwanda’s success is that its leaders are building “modern institutions on traditional values.”
They built a system of community justice, called Gacaca, which integrated their need for nationwide reconciliation with an ancient tradition of clemency.
They breathed life back into a civic tradition of Umuganda, where one day a month, citizens, including the president, gather together to weed their fields, clean their streets, and build homes for the poorest among them.
In 2015, the government of Rwanda and the Boston-based Partners In Health (PIH), with the help of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and the Cummings Foundation, established the private, not-for-profit University of Global Health Equity (UGHE).
The university is founded on the principle that every member of a community deserves the same care and opportunity, and focuses on the delivery of quality health care to those who need it most.
Agnes Binagwaho, a co-founder of UGHE who is a former minister of health and an adjunct professor at Harvard Medical School, once said to me, “Why would I want to raise my children in a nation where all children don’t get the same medical care as they do?”
Rwanda’s government has already pledged $43 million to UGHE in land and infrastructure support.
Its leaders have launched a two-year, part-time Master of Science in Global Health Delivery to teach how to create national health care in developing countries.
Lecturers from Rwanda’s Ministry of Health, Harvard Medical School, Yale University, and Tufts University taught Rwandan students everything from epidemiology to budget management.
Last summer, UGHE began construction on a 250-acre campus in Butaro.
This year, 250 professionals from as far away as Mexico and Australia will compete for 25 spots on that campus.
Undergraduate and graduate degrees in nursing and oral health, and non-clinical programs in research and health management, are next.
In 2018, UGHE’s campus will also be home to a school of medicine.
It will provide space for generations of health professionals to learn how to heal patients, comprehend the sociology of disease, and build the health systems that make a strong society.
UGHE’s founders believe that, by the time the university celebrates its ten-year anniversary, 480 students will have graduated; another 870 will be earning their degrees; and over 2,500 professionals will have attended executive education courses.
They expect that over 1,000 of the students passing through the UGHE’s doors in that first decade will arrive from the rest of Africa, Asia, Europe, and the Americas.
Rwandans will invite these international students to visit their communities to observe their traditions and learn how to care for their people.
The young men and women will attend Rwandans’ weddings and funerals, learn to prepare and enjoy their foods, and acquire some of their language, the portal through which to view their sturdy values.
Rwandans will teach their international guests that in Africa, family is an all-encompassing concept, and that, in Rwanda, an entire generation treats the next as its own children.
The international network of UGHE alumni, unified by their commitment to realize health equity for their own communities, will become a global force for change.
Though regarded by many as one of the safest and least corrupt societies in the world, Rwanda faces a great shortage of doctors and nurses.
There are 684 physicians in Rwanda, a total that is far below the 1,182 physicians proposed by the Ministry of Health, and only 27% of the World Health Organization’s recommended minimum of 2,576 physicians.
UGHE has already generated jobs, by hiring local laborers, and has increased access to the region, by creating new roads.
It could boost Rwanda’s GDP by 0.5% per year, and every dollar invested in UGHE could generate $2 worth of return in economic development, according to McKinsey & Company.
Some social scientists assert that poverty is not just a matter of poor nutrition, lack of medical care, and inadequate shelter; it also means exclusion from global networks of trade, science and commerce.
This isolation is pernicious, because it destroys people’s hope and aspirations for a better life.
UGHE will be Rwanda’s newest institution, a public-private collaboration based on traditional values: community, trust, hard work, and optimism about the future.
The Rwandans will accomplish this, as they do many things, because they believe that the only investment that can bring infinite returns is in their children, and because graduates of the University of Global Health Equity will be their sons and daughters, too.
CAMBRIDGE – Despite the recent upturn in some of its member countries, the eurozone’s economy remains in the doldrums, with the overall rate of annual GDP growth this year likely to be only slightly higher than 1%.
Even Germany’s growth rate is below 2%, while GDP is still declining in France, Italy, and Spain.
And this slow rate of growth has kept the eurozone’s total unemployment rate at a painfully high 12%.
The annual inflation rate, at just 0.5%, is now so close to zero that even a minor shock could push it into negative territory and trigger a downward price spiral.
Deflation would weaken aggregate demand by raising the real (inflation-adjusted) value of household and corporate debt, and by increasing real interest rates.
Lower demand could, in turn, cause the fall in prices to accelerate, sending prices into a dangerous tailspin.
But a sharp decline in the euro’s exchange rate – say, by 15% – would remedy many of the eurozone’s current economic problems.
A weaker euro would raise the cost of imports and the potential prices of exports, thus pushing up the eurozone’s overall inflation rate.
Devaluation would also boost average eurozone GDP growth by stimulating exports and encouraging Europeans to substitute domestically produced goods and services for imported items.
Although competitiveness within the eurozone would be unaffected, a weaker euro would significantly improve the external balance with the rest of the world, which accounts for about half of eurozone trade.
European Central Bank President Mario Draghi has emphasized his concern that the euro’s rise over the past three years has increased the risk of deflation.
But it was his famous declaration in July 2012 that the ECB would do “whatever it takes” to preserve the euro that, while successful in reducing interest rates in the distressed countries of the eurozone periphery, also contributed to the euro’s current strength.
Today, neither Draghi’s recent statements nor the prospect of an American-style program of large-scale asset purchases (also known as quantitative easing) has caused the euro to weaken or the inflation rate to move back toward the target level of 2%.
So the operative question is how to reduce the euro’s relative value while maintaining the perception of stability that Draghi helped to establish in 2012.
Because quantitative easing by the ECB has been advocated as a way to weaken the euro, it is worthwhile to examine the impact of its use by the Federal Reserve on the value of the dollar and the inflation rate in the United States.
The real trade-weighted value of the dollar is now at the same level that it was in 2007, before the onset of the Great Recession.
It rose briefly during the peak crisis year of 2008, as global investors sought the safe haven of dollar-denominated assets, but retreated during 2009 to its previous level.
The dollar’s value then remained relatively stable during more than three years of quantitative easing – and actually rose during 2013, when the Fed’s asset purchases reached a high of more than $1 trillion.
Of course, other factors influenced the dollar’s value during this period as well.
Nonetheless, the behavior of the dollar’s exchange rate during the period of quantitative easing offers no support for the proposed use of large-scale asset purchases by the ECB as a way to bring about euro depreciation.
The Fed’s quantitative easing also did not cause an increase in the rate of inflation.
The consumer price index rose by 1.6% in 2010, when quantitative easing began, then increased somewhat faster in 2011 and 2012, before dropping back to a gain of just 1.5% in 2013, the peak year for asset purchases.
If the ECB wants to reduce the value of the euro and increase the eurozone’s near-term inflation rate, the only reliable way to do so may be by direct intervention in the currency market – that is, selling euros and buying a basket of other currencies.
While direct intervention to weaken the euro would create challenges in other parts of the world, policymakers in the US and elsewhere should recognize the importance of a more competitive euro to the future of the European economy.
WASHINGTON, DC – June 12 marks the first anniversary of Mahmoud Ahmadinejad’s disputed re-election as Iran’s president.
Despite the Iranian opposition’s continuing efforts to contest the outcome and advance political liberalization, Ahmadinejad and his allies have largely succeeded in consolidating their hold on power by using brute force to repress the reform movement.
Hopes that a popular uprising might topple the regime have fizzled.
The Iranian regime continues to defy the international community’s efforts to prevent it from developing nuclear weapons.
In response, US President Barack Obama’s administration has been working through the United Nations Security Council to impose tougher economic sanctions.
Nonetheless, Iran edges toward mastering the process of enriching uranium to weapons-grade purity.
The closer Iran gets to developing a nuclear weapon, the greater the likelihood that Israel, with or without US help, might attack Iran’s nuclear facilities.
The Iranian government’s intransigence, its blatant efforts to mislead nuclear inspectors, its odious calls for the destruction of Israel, its brutal repression of political opponents – all provide good reason for Obama to slam the door shut on dialogue.
With diplomacy having failed to curb Iran’s nuclear ambitions, critics of engagement charge, it is time to resort to coercion before Iran crosses the nuclear Rubicon.
A rising chorus of voices now forswears engagement with Iran’s rulers, insisting that it is time for the regime to go.
But closing off dialogue with Iran would be a precipitous and dangerous mistake.
As my new book, How Enemies Become Friends, confirms, even fierce adversaries can settle their differences through negotiation.
For four compelling reasons, the US and its allies should keep the door open to dialogue until the eleventh hour.
First, tighter sanctions make sense only as a diplomatic tool, not as a blunt instrument of coercion.
The new sanctions simply are not severe enough to intimidate Iran into submission, and more restrictive ones would not pass muster within the Security Council.
Accordingly, if tougher sanctions prove to be useful, they will do so by confronting Iran with a united diplomatic front, thereby encouraging its government to make a deal in order to end the country’s isolation.
New sanctions are warranted, but as a complement, not an alternative, to diplomacy.
Second, the costs of abandoning diplomacy are so high that continued engagement makes sense even as Iran refuses to budge.
To give up on diplomacy is to leave the international community with two ugly options: living with a nuclear Iran or carrying out a preventive military strike against Iran’s nuclear installations.
Should Iran possess the ultimate weapon, it might embrace a new restraint in its foreign policy; nuclear-weapons states, precisely because they confront the prospect of nuclear retaliation, have historically tread with caution.
But the Iranian regime is no ordinary government; it may not adhere to the normal practices of nuclear restraint.
Even if it does, a nuclear Iran may trigger an arms race in the region and embolden an Iranian government that already supports extremist movements throughout the Middle East.
An American security umbrella over the Persian Gulf and Israel might calm nerves, but it would do little to counter increased Iranian support of Islamic radicals.
Even if a strike was an operational success, it would only set back Iran’s nuclear program by several years – while giving the regime a new incentive to acquire a nuclear deterrent and build better hidden and defended nuclear facilities.
In response to an attack, Iran might well seek to obstruct shipping in the Persian Gulf, potentially triggering oil shortages and soaring prices.
Iran could also intensify efforts to fund and arm insurgents in Iraq and Afghanistan, imperiling both countries.
And it could launch attacks on US, European, and Israeli targets on a global basis.
Such prospects make continued diplomacy, however elusive the prospects of success, nothing short of mandatory.
The third reason for pursuing dialogue is that factional infighting and political intrigue within the Iranian regime make for considerable political fluidity.
Admittedly, turmoil in Tehran brings inconstancy to Iran’s foreign policy, warranting caution about the prospects for a meaningful diplomatic breakthrough.
But internal jockeying for power also means that a coalitional alignment favoring a negotiated settlement just might fall into place.
Ahmadinejad himself, after all, late last year voiced enthusiasm for a Western proposal to break the logjam by exporting Iran’s uranium for processing abroad, only to reverse course soon thereafter.
Then last month, he reversed course again, working with Brazil and Turkey to craft a watered-down version of the original proposal.
But his mercurial ways make it plausible that he may find it politically advantageous to strike a serious bargain on the nuclear issue.
Finally, even as stalemate continues on Iran’s uranium enrichment, continued engagement may offer a roundabout means of arriving at a bargain on the nuclear issue.
Dialogue with the US could focus on areas, such as Iraq and Afghanistan, where the two parties share a measure of common ground.
Joint efforts to combat drug trafficking in Afghanistan, for example, could help dilute the mutual antagonism and distrust that contribute to blockage on the nuclear front.
Iran remains several years away from mastering the technology needed to build nuclear weapons, which provides time to search for such diplomatic openings.
With Iran having spurned Obama’s offers of compromise, it is tempting for the US administration to turn its back on dialogue.
Even with new sanctions in the offing, dialogue still offers the best prospect for peacefully resolving what may be the world’s most dangerous dispute.
MUMBAI – Emerging economies are often grouped together as something of a monolith.
But when it comes to economic performance, they diverge widely, with only some countries achieving rapid and relatively consistent growth over long periods.
In the McKinsey Global Institute’s recent review of the per capita GDP growth of 71 emerging economies, 18 stood out.
In seven – China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, South Korea, and Thailand – per capita GDP grew by at least 3.5% annually over the half-century from 1965 to 2016.
The other 11 high performers tend to get less attention, as their per capita GDP growth began to accelerate more recently.
Yet Azerbaijan, Belarus, Cambodia, Ethiopia, India, Kazakhstan, Laos, Myanmar, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Vietnam all achieved per capita GDP growth of at least 5% for 20 years, from 1996 to 2016.
Development economists have long sought to identify the “secret sauce” that enables certain economies to achieve more stable and robust growth than their counterparts.
A look at what these 18 economies have in common provides powerful insights into what that formula might be.
From a policy perspective, all 18 of the economies on our list have pursued pro-growth policies that encouraged a virtuous cycle of rising productivity, income, and demand.
Those agendas included, for example, steps to increase capital accumulation, such as by forcing retirement saving; efforts to boost government effectiveness; and measures to encourage more competitive dynamics in the domestic market.
This has enabled the rise of a generation of large companies that have served as powerful engines of GDP growth.
And, indeed, the 18 standout emerging economies have twice as many competitive, publicly listed companies with annual revenues of $500 million or more as other developing countries (adjusted for economy size).
In these countries, the revenue-to-GDP ratio almost tripled in just 20 years, from 22% in 1995 to 64% in 2016 – far higher than the ratio in other emerging economies, and approaching high-income country levels.
Over the same period, the contribution of value-added to GDP also rose sharply, from 11% to 27%.
Examples of highly successful emerging-economy firms include the Chinese giants Alibaba and Tencent.
Regional titans like as M-Pesa, a mobile phone-based financial-services firm that started in Kenya, has spread throughout East Africa, and Go-Jek, an Indonesian ride-hailing and logistics company, is now expanding to the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, and Vietnam.
Contrary to popular perception, these companies succeed in a hyper-competitive environment, where getting to the top is hard, and staying there is even harder.
In the 18 high-performing emerging economies, only 45% of firms that were in the top quintile, in terms of profit generation, in 2001-2005 were still there a decade later in 2011-2015.
Over the same period, in the high-income economies, 62% of incumbents managed to hold onto their positions.
From 1995 to 2016, large publicly listed companies in the fastest-growing emerging economies expanded their annual net income 2-5 percentage points faster than firms in other emerging and high-income economies.
From 2005 to 2016, they contributed about 40% of the total combined revenue and net income growth of all big public companies worldwide, even though they accounted for only about 25% of total revenue and net income in 2016.
More than 120 of these companies have joined the Fortune Global 500 list since 2000.
The most successful emerging-economy companies – which tend to be export-oriented – not only boost growth, but also help to spur progress in the business environment.
Moreover, they fuel productivity gains by investing in assets, research and development, and job training at a higher rate than small and medium-size firms, though the latter are also essential elements of successful countries’ business ecosystems.
The question now is whether the high-performing emerging economies can sustain rapid and consistent growth, and whether their peers can emulate their success.
For starters, a phenomenon known as premature deindustrialization is taking hold, with manufacturing growth in developing countries peaking at much lower levels of income than in the past.
Furthermore, economies around the globe are being challenged by the rise of automation – a process that will only accelerate.
If the other 53 emerging economies we looked at matched the productivity growth of their 18 high-performing peers, the global economy would be $11 trillion richer by 2030 – the equivalent of adding another China.
For example, as China moves from low-cost manufacturing to knowledge-intensive manufacturing, it will create space for low-income countries like Bangladesh and Vietnam to expand their manufacturing sectors, such as in textiles.
Over the past 15 years, the emerging economies have accounted for about two-thirds of global GDP growth.
If countries implement smart policies, building on the lessons of their most dynamic counterparts, robust and consistent growth can prevail across the emerging world.
NEW HAVEN – At 7.7%, China’s annual GDP growth in the first quarter of this year was slower than many expected.
While the data were hardly devastating relative to a consensus forecast of 8.2%, many (including me) expected a second consecutive quarterly rebound from the slowdown that appeared to have ended in the third quarter of 2012.
China doubters around the world were quick to pounce on the number, expressing fears of a stall, or even a dreaded double dip.
But slower GDP growth is actually good for China, provided that it reflects the long-awaited structural transformation of the world’s most dynamic economy.
The broad outlines of this transformation are well known – a shift from export- and investment-led growth to an economic structure that draws greater support from domestic private consumption.
Less well known is that a rebalanced China should have a slower growth rate – the first hints of which may now be evident.
A rebalanced China can grow more slowly for one simple reason: By drawing increased support from services-led consumer demand, China’s new model will embrace a more labor-intensive growth recipe.
China’s services sector requires about 35% more jobs per unit of GDP than do manufacturing and construction – the primary drivers of the old model.
That number has potentially huge implications, because it means that China could grow at an annual rate in the 7-8% range and still achieve its objectives with respect to employment and poverty reduction.
China has struggled to attain these goals with anything less than 10% growth, because the old model was not generating enough jobs per unit of output.
As Chinese manufacturing moved up the value chain, firms increasingly replaced workers with machines embodying the latest technologies.
As a result, its economic model spawned a labor-saving, capital-intensive growth dynamic.
Capital-labor substitution is at the heart of modern productivity strategies for manufacturing-based economies.
But it left China in a deepening hole: increasingly deficient in jobs per unit of output, it needed more units of output to absorb its surplus labor.
The old manufacturing model, which fueled an unprecedented 20-fold increase in per capita income relative to the early 1990’s, also sowed the seeds of excessive resource consumption and environmental degradation.
Services-led growth is, in many ways, the antidote to the “unstable, unbalanced, uncoordinated, and ultimately unsustainable” growth model that former Premier Wen Jiabao’s famously criticized in 2007.
A services-led model provides China with an alternative, environmentally friendlier, and ultimately more sustainable economic structure.
It is premature, of course, to conclude that a services-led transformation to slower growth is now at hand.
The latest data hint at such a possibility, with the tertiary sector (services) expanding at an 8.3% annual rate in the first quarter of this year – the third consecutive quarter of acceleration and a half-percentage point faster than the 7.8% first-quarter gain recorded by the secondary sector (manufacturing and construction).
But it will take more than a few quarters of mildly encouraging data to validate such an important shift in the Chinese economy’s underlying structure.
Not surprisingly, China skeptics are putting a different spin on the latest growth numbers.
Fears of a shadow-bank-induced credit bubble now top the worry list, reinforcing longstanding concerns that China may succumb to the dreaded “middle-income trap” – a sustained growth slowdown that has ensnared most high-growth emerging economies at the juncture that China has now reached.
But it is unlikely to occur if China can carry out the services-led pro-consumption rebalancing that remains the core strategic initiative of its current (12th) Five-Year Plan.
Invariably, the middle-income trap afflicts those emerging economies that cling to early-stage development models for too long.
For China, the risk will be highest if it sticks with the timeworn recipe of unbalanced manufacturing- and construction-led growth, which has created such serious sustainability problems.
If China fails to rebalance, weak external demand from a crisis-battered developed world will continue to hobble its export machine, forcing it to up the ante on a credit- and investment-led growth model – in effect, doubling down on resource-intensive and environmentally damaging growth.
But I remain hopeful that China’s new leadership team will move quickly to implement its new model.
Financial markets, as well as growth-starved developed economies, are not thrilled with the natural rhythm of slower growth that a rebalanced Chinese economy is likely to experience.
Resource industries – indeed, resource-based economies like Australia, Canada, Brazil, and Russia – have become addicted to China’s old strain of unsustainable hyper-growth.
The United States is likely to have a different problem with consumer-led growth in China.
After all, higher private consumption implies an end to China’s surplus saving – and thus to the seemingly open-ended recycling of that surplus into dollar-based assets such as US Treasury bills.
Just as China must embrace slower growth as a natural consequence of its rebalancing imperative, the rest of the world will need to figure out how to cope when it does.
MUNICH – Despite huge rescue packages, interest-rate spreads in Europe refuse to budge.
Markets have not yet found their equilibrium, and the governments on Europe’s southwestern rim are nervously watching how events unfold.
The rescue packages were put together on the weekend of May 8-9 in Brussels.
In addition to the €80 billion program already agreed for Greece, the European Union countries agreed on a €500 billion credit line for other distressed countries.
The driving force behind all this was French President Nicolas Sarkozy, who colluded with the heads of Europe’s southern countries.
French banks, which were overly exposed to southern European government bonds, were key beneficiaries of the rescue packages.
Since rescue measures beyond the pre-arranged Greek package had not been on the agenda for the Brussels meeting, German Chancellor Angela Merkel thought she could safely go to Moscow to commemorate the end of World War II – unlike Sarkozy, who declined Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin’s invitation.
Worse, the leader of the German delegation to the EU meeting fell ill and was taken to hospital upon arrival in Brussels.
Proclaiming a systemic crisis of the euro, Sarkozy seized the opportunity and took Germany by surprise.
He asked for huge sums of money and, as Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Zapatero reported, threatened to pull France out of the euro and break up the Franco-German axis unless Germany opened its purse.
After just two days of negotiations, the Maastricht Treaty’s no-bailout clause, which Germany once had made a condition for giving up the Deutsche Mark, was defunct.
The “Club Med,” as Germans call the southern countries, had taken over Europe.
Even the European Central Bank chipped in, buying government bonds of over-indebted countries, using a loophole in the Maastricht Treaty and overruling the Bank’s German representatives.
Germany’s president stepped down soon after the decisions – some say because of them.
Germany’s political elite are in an uproar, and serious voices advocate splitting the eurozone into northern and southern tiers, with France relegated to the latter.
The euro has successfully protected Europe against exchange-rate risks, and it is a useful step towards further European integration.
Moreover, the stability provided by the Franco-German axis is indispensable for Europe.
Nevertheless, the tensions created by Sarkozy’s recklessness threaten Europe’s political stability, heightening market uncertainty relative to what a more prudent, coordinated rescue program would have implied.
The programs that have been agreed will not suffice to reassure creditors, and Germany will most likely be unwilling to bow once again to Sarkozy in the coming negotiations to prolong the rescue measures – at least as they are constructed now – beyond the initially stipulated three years.
In order to overcome the no-bailout clause, Sarkozy and other European leaders dramatized the decline of southern European governments’ bonds and the corresponding increase in interest-rate spreads.
By formally proclaiming a systemic euro crisis – when in fact there was only nervous market reaction concerning a few European countries’ government bonds – they could invoke Article 122 of the Union Treaty, which was intended to help member countries in the event of natural disasters beyond their control.
If anything, the proclamation of a systemic crisis poured fuel on the fire.
Investors took Europe’s leaders at their word, because politicians usually downplay rather than overstate a crisis.
The average interest-rate spread relative to Germany of the countries protected by the new rescue package was 1.08 percentage points on May 7, when the world was claimed to be going under.
Then it seemed that the rescue packages were pushing the spreads to much lower values, but optimism faded as European leaders’ interpretation of the crisis sunk in with more and more market participants.
In the week ending June 18, the average spread had climbed to 1.1 points.
Obviously, the market is now as nervous as it was before that May weekend.
In 1995, shortly before the euro was announced, the corresponding interest-rate spread was 2.6 percentage points, more than twice today’s level.
The euro was simply in no danger when European leaders decided to rescue it, and it is not in danger now.
Markets are just moving towards a new equilibrium with higher interest-rate spreads, which reflect the higher default risk of some European countries – a bit like in pre-euro times, though much less extreme.
There is no reason for panic, and every reason to stay calm and wait for the new equilibrium to emerge.
Interest-rate spreads between safe and risky assets are natural to functioning credit markets.
The Stability and Growth Pact, aimed at punishing countries that breach the 3%-of-GDP deficit limit, was a joke: not a single wayward country was ever punished.
Fortunately, capital markets finally stepped in to impose the necessary hard budget constraints on governments.
This discipline will stem the gigantic capital imports by the countries at Europe’s periphery and end the overheating ushered in by the interest-rate convergence that the euro brought about.
These countries will go through a slump that will reduce their inflation (perhaps bringing them close to deflation) improve their competitiveness, and reduce their current-account deficits.
Conversely, Germany, which has suffered from relative deflation and a long slump under the euro, will experience an inflationary boom that will reduce its competitiveness and current-account surplus.
French Finance Minister Christine Lagarde, who often complained about trade imbalances in Europe, should applaud these market reactions, which were unintentionally strengthened by her president.
RHINECLIFF, NY – Around the world, governments and businesses are constantly being called upon to make big investments in solar, wind, and geothermal energy, as well as biofuels.
But, in the United States, unlike in Europe and Asia, discussion of hydrogen energy and fuel cells as systemic, game-changing technologies is largely absent.
That needs to change: these clean, renewable energy sources promise not only zero-emission baseload power, but also a zero-emission fuel for cars and trucks, the biggest polluters of them all.
By now, many have heard about plans by big carmakers – including Honda, Toyota, and Hyundai – to launch hydrogen fuel-cell cars commercially around 2015.
Daimler, Ford, and Nissan plan to launch such cars around 2017.
Germany plans to build at least 50 hydrogen fueling stations by 2015 as the start of a countrywide network.
But a bigger, largely unreported, message is that some European countries, especially Germany, have launched projects that combine renewables like solar and wind with hydrogen for energy storage, implying clean, zero-emission, stable power grids that require no coal, oil, or nuclear power.
Indeed, the bottom line of a new study by two American researchers, Willett Kempton and Cory Budischak, is that the combination of renewables and hydrogen storage could fully power a large electricity grid by 2030 at costs comparable to those today.
Kempton and Budischak designed a computer model for wind, solar, and storage to meet demand for one-fifth of the US grid.
The results buck “the conventional wisdom that renewable energy is too unreliable and expensive,” says Kempton.
“For example,” according to Budischak, “using hydrogen for storage, we can run an electric system that today would meet a need of 72 gigawatts, 99.9 % of the time, using 17 GW of solar, 68 GW of offshore wind, and 115 GW of inland wind.”
Their study lends scientific supportto several such projects underway in Europe aimed at proving that hydrogen gas, converted from water via electrolysis – think of it as natural gas minus the polluting carbon – and stored, for example, in subterranean salt caverns, can smooth out fluctuations inherent in solar and wind energy.
It builds in part on two recent studies at Stanford University and the Carnegie Institution, which conclude that, as Carnegie atmospheric scientist Ken Caldeira put it, “there is more than enough energy available in winds to power all of civilization.”
The latest effort, scheduled to get underway outside Brussels this year, is the delightfully named “Don Quichote” project (“Demonstration of New Qualitative Innovative Concept of Hydrogen Out of wind Turbine Electricity”), designed to highlight utility-scale energy storage and transport, and to provide power for fuel-cell forklift trucks.
The project’s partners are a Belgian grocery chain, the European Commission, and various European organizations and companies.
Canada’s Hydrogenics is providing the electrolyzer and a fuel cell.
Meanwhile, near Berlin, five companies launched a €10 million ($13 million) pilot project at Berlin’s main airport in Schoenefeld in December, expanding and converting an existing hydrogen fueling station to CO2 neutrality by linking it to a nearby wind farm.
Earlier last year, two German utilities, Thüga and E.ON, announced two gas demonstration plants.
And the world’s first renewable energy/hydrogen hybrid power plant, producing both electricity and hydrogen as car fuel, started production in the fall of 2011.
The previous year, German Chancellor Angela Merkel laid the plant’s cornerstone herself, sending a strong signal of her seriousness about Germany’s shift to clean, renewable energy.
Indeed, the much-noted Energiewende, or energy turnaround, that she announced in 2010 is arguably one of the most audacious acts of environmental statesmanship yet.
According to the author and environmentalist Bill McKibben, Germany is in the international forefront of fighting climate change: “The clear alternative and the best news from 2012 came from Germany, the one big country that’s taken climate change seriously....There were days last summer when [Germans] generated more than half the power that they used from solar panels.”
In fact, hydrogen technology will be an integral part of Germany’s evolving renewable/alternative energy-based system.
Germany’s move toward renewable energy is likely to have a much broader positive impact.
A six-article series, “The German Nuclear Exit,” in the Bulletin of the Atomic Scientist argues that the move away from nuclear energy is already “yielding measurable economic and environmental benefits.”
More broadly, Lutz Mez, a political scientist at Berlin’s Free University, argues that the country’s shift has “observably decoupled energy supply from economic growth,” and that the “evolving Energiewende, rather than the nuclear phase-out” implies “continuing reforms of social, economic, technological, and cultural policy in Germany.”
War and its huge cost; the falling dollar; mounting trade and budget deficits; the chicanery that hollowed out companies like Enron and WorldCom; the bursting of the high-tech bubble: capitalism American-style is both under strain and under a cloud.
From left to right, many European intellectuals think that the capitalist game as played by the US is passé.
Strong on rhetoric and fueled by a wave of anti-Americanism, that search is nonetheless thin on facts.
Stories of corporate malfeasance do, of course, abound in the US.
But it is facile to jump from individual corporate scandals to broad conclusions about the supposed rottenness of the American economy.
A close look at productivity growth (output per hour worked) in the US and Europe shows that US capitalism remains as vital than ever.
Having grown at an average annual rate of just 1.6% since the early 1970's, annual US productivity growth in the non-farm business sector has accelerated to an average of 2.6% in the seven years since 1995, with no sign of a slowdown.
In 2002, productivity grew by 4.8% - an extraordinary result, because productivity normally falls during economic slowdowns.
Annual productivity growth actually slackened in the second half of the1990's, from 2.5% to just 1.3% today.
This productivity gap is often attributed to the "New Economy" that emerged in the late 1990's.
But technology spreads rapidly: the same Windows or SAP programs are available in all countries, including Europe.
Six OECD countries do better than America in terms of output per hour worked: Norway, Belgium, France, Ireland, the Netherlands, and Germany.
But the rankings change if you make output per capita (a better measure of a country's economic well-being) the standard: here the US comes first, and France and Germany drop, respectively, to 16th and 11th place.
The reason for examining output per person rather than output per hour worked is simple: what determines a nation's wealth is how much each person works, and how many people work.
This is where the US overtakes Europe: fewer people work in Europe than in the US, and those in Europe who do work don't work as much.
Annual hours worked in the US are about 1800, about 1500 in France, and 1400 in Germany.
One reason why Europeans work less is because they pay more taxes, and high taxes are necessary to support those who do not work - an obvious vicious circle.
Perhaps the Europeans are perfectly happy to work less and enjoy more free time, both in terms of having more vacations during their working age, and spending less time in the active labor force.
This is a legitimate choice, but once made, Europeans should stop looking for scapegoats for slow growth.
For the source of the problem is neither the European Central Bank, nor the Stability Pact.
Europe grows less because it works less - and it should not be surprised if a number of so-called "developing countries" soon catch up with Europe in terms of income per capita.
The availability of new technologies is a necessary, but by no means sufficient, condition to raise a country's standard of living, because there must also be companies that are able to make use of them.
In the early 20th century, it took over twenty years for the electrical engine to transform the textile industry.
To do so required a change in work practices and in the way firms were run.
Unions opposed such change, but it also took time for bosses to understand that the way they ran their plants needed to change.
During the 1980's, a wave of leveraged buyouts transformed US corporate culture, evidently making bosses more receptive to technological innovation.
Not so in Europe, where the interests of a company's employees and their unions often come before those of its shareholders.
Indeed, at one European newspaper, articles that arrived via e-mail were re-typed by typographers: the technology for transferring them electronically was available, but not the work rules to allow the paper to apply it.
Many European firms have complex ownership structures, with large shareholders whose interests often conflict with those of the company - hardly the best way to take sound business decisions.
Whatever the corporate horror stories in US banks, almost no European investment bank remains, and Germany is seriously considering a state-owned "bad bank" to bail out its all-powerful banking giants.
If Europe wants to work less, it must be extraordinarily productive when it does work if it is to keep up with the hard-working Americans.
That is why Europeans should hope that the wave of corporate restructuring and reformation, which many thought would follow inevitably in the wake of the creation of the single market, begins to crest across the Continent and change the way businesses are run.
BRUSSELS – August was quieter than feared on the European bond markets.
So, while resting on Europe’s beaches and mountains, policymakers could take a step back from the sound and fury of the last few months and think about the future.
The model of a federal union that emerged from its history consists of a single currency managed by a federal agency; closely integrated markets for products, labor, and capital; a federal budget that partly, but automatically, offsets economic disturbances affecting individual states; a federal government that assumes responsibility for tackling other major risks, not least those emanating from the banking sector; and states that provide regional public goods but play virtually no role in macroeconomic stabilization.
This model served as a template for the European Union’s architects, notably for the creation of a unified market and a common currency.
But, in several respects, Europe has diverged significantly from the American model.
Back in the 1970’s, there was still hope that common spending would eventually amount to 5-10% of EU GDP, but this dream never materialized.
The EU’s budget today is no larger than it was 30 years ago: a meager 1% of GDP.
Unlike in the US, where federal public spending grew as a consequence of the creation of new expenditure programs throughout the twentieth century, public spending was already high at the national level when Europe began to integrate.
Significant federal spending programs could have emerged only from the transfer of existing national programs to the European level.
More recently, the eurozone has begun to create a system of mutual insurance among member states.
Since 2010, assistance has been extended to Greece, Ireland, Portugal, and now Cyprus.
Spain may soon follow suit, with a particular focus on support for its banking sector.
It is conditional on beneficiaries’ having signed on to a fiscal treaty that commits them to budgetary responsibility and makes them liable to quasi-automatic sanctions.
Moreover, assistance requires that beneficiaries implement negotiated measures and accept close external monitoring of policy developments.
Unlike in America, however, EU member states’ governments – and, increasingly, their parliaments – are calling the shots.
Because assistance does not rest on federal resources, but rather on the pooling of national resources, creditor states inevitably demand more power in exchange for providing more support to their neighbors.
As a result, currency unification has not brought Europe closer to the US; on the contrary, it has pushed Europe further away.
In the US, the federal government acts as an overall shield against common risks and provides automatic, unconditional support to states in trouble; but, in the end, it does not come to the rescue of a defaulting state, nor does it take over its government.
In Europe, by contrast, there is almost no aggregate shield and almost no automatic support for member states in trouble – better-off states simply extend a conditional helping hand to prevent default.
So, while US states compete with the center for power, in Europe they increasingly compete with each other.
This inter-state rivalry – at times bordering on acrimony – is what makes the politics of European integration difficult.
All federations have experienced periods of tense relations between the federal and state governments.
But to accept that your neighbors look over your shoulder and tell you what to do is one degree more dreadful than to accept oversight from the center.
Indeed, a major problem with the current state of affairs is the weakness of EU institutions that are in charge of advancing the common interest and that are accountable to Europeans as a whole.
Common European direction cannot emerge from the calculus of national interests by governments and parliaments that are accountable only to national voters.
The big question to which nobody has a clear answer is whether Europe is in the process of inventing a model of its own, or has only taken a detour from the inevitable choice between disaggregation and convergence on the standard federal template.
One solution could be to provide national representatives a venue to convene for European-wide debates.
Another would be to transfer the insurance role to a federal institution accountable to the European parliament.
Whatever route it takes, Europe in the coming years will have to address the weak representation of the common interest – or else admit that no such common interest can justify remaining on the path of integration.
LONDON – “In this world, there are only two tragedies,” Oscar Wilde once wrote.
“One is not getting what one wants, and the other is getting it.”
As the US Federal Reserve inches closer to achieving its targets for the domestic economy, it faces growing pressure to normalize monetary policy.
But the domestic economy is no longer the Fed’s sole consideration in policymaking.
On the contrary, America’s monetary authority has all but explicitly recognized a new mandate: promoting global financial stability.
The US Congress created the Fed in 1913 as an independent agency removed from partisan politics, tasked with ensuring domestic price stability and maximizing domestic employment.
Its role has expanded over time, and the Fed, along with many of its developed-country counterparts, has engaged in increasingly unconventional monetary policy – quantitative easing, credit easing, forward guidance, and so on – since the 2008 global financial crisis.
A generation of global market participants knows only a world of low (or even negative) interest rates and artificially inflated asset prices.
And while the Fed’s recent rhetoric has been dovish, the fundamentals of the US economy – particularly those that supposedly matter most for the Fed – indicate a clear case for further rate hikes.
The unemployment rate is down to just 5%, job growth is strong and consistent, and jobless claims have been on a clear downward trajectory for several years.
As for the price-stability mandate, the oil-price collapse has naturally affected headline figures over the past year, but the trend in core inflation (excluding the energy component) suggests that the Fed is falling behind the curve.
Core CPI is at a post-crisis high, having risen 2.3% year on year in February, and 2.2% in March.
With the household debt-to-asset ratio now approaching levels last seen in the 1990s, consumers have plenty of capacity to ramp up their borrowing.
At the same time, the cost drag on inflation is set to diminish as the oil price stabilizes, and the dollar’s recent softness implies further inflationary pressure.
As a result, the Fed is effectively trapped between a US economy that increasingly justifies normalization of monetary policy and the interest of fragile global markets – in which about 60% of the world’s transactions are dollar-denominated – in further dovishness.
Any suggestion that the Fed will hike faster or sooner than anticipated leads to fears of tighter financial conditions, and violent risk-off moves.
After a multi-year bull market in equities and fixed-income securities, stimulated by the very monetary policies the Fed is trying to leave behind, there is no valuation support to dampen the reaction.
In the absence of genuinely robust global growth, which is unlikely in the near term, financial markets are relying on extremely loose monetary policy to prop up prices.
The Fed’s rate decision in March, and Fed Chair Janet Yellen’s commentary, was a case in point.
The Fed apparently could not stomach the sell-off in global financial markets in January and February, which was driven largely by concerns about further tightening.
This is odd, because effects on consumption from changes in financial wealth (stocks and bonds) are small.
Similarly, changes in the cost of capital, including the equity cost of capital, have a minor impact on business investment.
In other words, from the standpoint of its dual mandate, the Fed should not be terribly concerned about market volatility, even of the magnitude seen in January and February.
But every signal sent from Yellen and the Fed was that policymakers were very concerned about exactly this.
And the rally in markets that came after the Fed backpedaled on the pace of rate increases has only served to strengthen the feedback loop between the probability of US interest-rate hikes and global market volatility.
The loop has become calcified into a new mandate for the Fed, with other global policymakers becoming increasingly overt in referring to it.
China’s deputy finance minister recently praised Yellen for her communication and cautious approach, which “takes us into consideration.”
If Yellen and the Fed feel beholden to financial markets, the risk of sharper rate hikes further down the road, as the Fed increasingly falls behind the inflation curve, will rise.
Given the low base, and the Fed’s obvious caution, nominal interest rates are unlikely to climb too far by the next US recession.
With a lack of traditional rate-cutting firepower, the next downturn could be longer than usual, compelling further reliance on unconventional monetary policy – even beyond the negative nominal interest rates now being pursued in Europe and Japan.
Indeed, Yellen’s predecessor, Ben Bernanke, recently addressed such possibilities, notably the potential for a permanent increase in the money supply (so-called helicopter money).
This could take a number of forms: quantitative easing combined with fiscal expansion (for example, higher infrastructure spending), direct cash transfers to the government, or, most radically, direct cash transfers to households.
Such extreme policies are still only theoretical, and implementing them would most likely spur heightened congressional scrutiny.
Nonetheless, the pressure to support global financial markets and other external economies suggests why the issue is being debated.
With the Fed deciding in their just-concluded April meeting, yet again, to hold rates, their dilemma is set only to intensify this year: normalize monetary policy in line with domestic fundamentals, or cede to the pressures of global financial markets.
The former is sure to usher in a highly volatile future; the latter would further entrench the Fed’s new mandate – one that undermines any semblance of central-bank independence.
But it was a mistake for the Norwegian Nobel Committee to cite his work in Aceh as a reason for giving him the prize.
As a recent story by Agence France Presse put it, Ahtisaari’s “most notable achievement was overseeing the 2005 reconciliation of the Indonesian government and the Free Aceh Movement rebels, bringing an end to a three-decade-old conflict that killed some 15,000 people.”
But it was Indonesia’s people and leaders who should have received the Nobel Peace Prize for the Aceh political miracle.
More fundamentally, the mentioning of Aceh in this Nobel citation raises serious questions about the mental maps used by the Nobel Prize Committee in making these awards.
They continue to assume that we live in an era of Western domination of world history.
Increasingly, the rest of the world has gone from being objects of world history to becoming its subjects.
By giving the Nobel Peace Prize to the Indonesians instead of a European mediator for Aceh, the Nobel Prize Committee would have recognized that the world has changed.
Three other big benefits would also have resulted from giving the award to an Indonesian.
Two key Indonesian leaders, President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono and Vice President Jusuf Kalla, showed remarkable political skill and courage in working out the peace deal for Aceh.
A Nobel Peace Prize for them would have shown the West that Muslims can be good peacemakers and, equally important, it would have sent a message of hope to the Islamic populations of the world that have seen their self-esteem eroded by stories of failure.
Hence, the Nobel Peace Prize Committee has squandered a valuable opportunity to send out a message of hope to the world’s 1.2 billion Muslims, one that would have rid the world of the grand global illusion that peacemaking is a “white man’s burden.”
VIENNA – The world faces two looming, interconnected energy challenges: how to provide reliable access to modern energy services to the one in five people worldwide who do not have it, while minimizing the damaging impact of climate change by reducing carbon emissions.
Surmounting these challenges requires finding more diverse, cleaner energy sources, which implies the need for expanded funding and incentives for research and development of clean technology.
But, while market forces reward innovation and creativity, their impact is substantially weakened in a global economy plagued by slow, uneven growth.
Given this, it is up to governments to stimulate and support the development of critical energy capabilities by rewarding innovation.
For centuries, governments have used prizes to spur innovative research that yields creative solutions to pressing global challenges.
Such prizes reflect genuine global leadership: transforming a major challenge into an opportunity to facilitate progress toward a better future.
In 1714, seven years after one of the worst naval accidents in the history of Britain’s Royal Navy, the United Kingdom launched the Longitude Prize, a £20,000 reward (equal to $5 million today) for developing a simple and practical method to determine a ship’s longitude reliably.
At the time, maritime navigation was based on a combination of science, experience, and luck, making it difficult, expensive, and dangerous, especially for those – such as the British government – bearing the financial burden of devastating shipwrecks and lost fleets.
Mariners had long known that, to determine their precise location, they needed to compare the time aboard ship and the time at the home port.
But, while they could figure out the former by watching the sun, clocks were not accurate on ships at sea, so they were unable to track the time elsewhere.
Even after the prize spurred scientists, inventors, and engineers from all walks of life into action, it took nearly a half-century for John Harrison, an English carpenter-turned-clockmaker, to win.
Motivated by the prospect of a handsome reward, Harrison worked for decades to create the marine chronometer, a timepiece capable of keeping accurate time at sea over the course of a long voyage, enabling sea captains to plot their course accurately.
The innovation revolutionized nautical and, later, aerial navigation, and served as a boon to British naval and commercial dominance.
Similarly, in 1795, the French government, with an army debilitated more by hunger than by enemies, offered prizes to anyone who could develop an effective food-preservation method.
After experimenting for 15 years, the Parisian Nicolas Appert won the prize with his ground breaking technique for preserving food in glass jars.
England’s Peter Durand subsequently built upon Appert’s method by using metal cans.
A half-century later, France’s Royal Academy of Sciences offered a cash prize to the scientist who could produce the best proof for or against spontaneous generation.
The award both catalyzed and subsidized the work of the chemist and bacteriologist Louis Pasteur, whose breakthrough discoveries led him to develop revolutionary methods – including the process that came to be known as pasteurization – for the sanitary production and preservation of food.
In order to tackle the twenty-first century’s most pressing challenge – providing access to sustainable energy for all – the world needs the same inspired leadership and long-term vision that spurred innovations in maritime navigation and food preservation.
The United Arab Emirates – where projected electricity demand will more than double by 2030 – is among the countries that are rising to the occasion.
The UAE enjoys substantial hydrocarbon resources, with oil and gas output accounting for 45% of GDP and 80% of national income, and fueling the country’s economic growth.
Indeed, energy has enabled the UAE to become one of the Middle East’s most developed economies – and thus has played a crucial role in securing the country’s global standing.
Nonetheless, its leaders have recognized the need to secure their country’s future by diversifying its energy sources; as a result, the UAE has emerged as a pioneer in the renewable-energy revolution.
The UAE’s toolkit for creative solutions includes the Zayed Future Energy Prize, an annual award for achievement in developing and deploying renewable energy and sustainable technologies.
Since its launch in 2008, nearly $10 million has been awarded for innovations that have changed the lives of people worldwide.
In January, during Abu Dhabi Sustainability Week, the UAE honored eight winners in five recipient categories with prizes totaling $4 million, rewarding proven innovators and giving them the financial support that they need.
Global leaders should follow such examples and provide the needed investment and incentives to support innovation in both the public and private sectors.
SANTIAGO – How should Latin America respond to US President Donald Trump’s America-first approach to the global economy?
Here’s one possible answer: build a free-trade area of the Americas without the United States.
The founding fathers of Latin America’s republics talked about it two centuries ago.
For most countries in the region, Europe or the US remained larger trading partners than their immediate neighbors.
In the early 1990s, then-US President George H.W. Bush grandly proposed a free-trade area from Alaska to Tierra del Fuego.
The US subsequently signed agreements with Canada, Mexico, Chile, Colombia, Peru, and Central America, but the ambitious and overarching north-south agreement did not materialize.
The good news is that most of the factors blocking regional free trade back then have disappeared.
So now is the right time to pick up on Simón Bolívar’s two-century-old idea.
One reason why a region-wide trade deal foundered was that proud Brazil was unwilling to attend a party whose main host was the US.
But if Trump sticks to his protectionist promises, we will no longer have to worry about US-Brazil rivalry within the same trade agreement.
In the past, US farm subsidies were also deal-breakers for large agricultural exporters like Argentina and, again, Brazil.
With the US out of the picture, this also becomes a non-issue.
As the 1990s progressed, left-wing populist governments came to power in a number of Latin American countries.
For these governments – in Argentina, Bolivia, Ecuador, Nicaragua, and, of course, Venezuela – free trade was a dirty “neoliberal” phrase.
For their leaders, too, an agreement with the US was out of the question.
Today, that brand of populism is (knock on wood) in retreat across Latin America.
In Argentina, the Peronists have lost the presidency; in Brazil, President Dilma Rousseff got herself impeached; and in Venezuela, President Nicolás Maduro’s increasingly dictatorial regime is teetering on the edge of the abyss.
Ecuador also may soon end its flirtation with populism: Rafael Correa’s handpicked successor did less well than expected in the recent first round of the country’s presidential election.
So, with the three main stumbling blocks gone, what is preventing a free-trade agreement of the Americas from being signed?
But there is no shortage of regional leaders who could carry the torch of trade integration from the Rio Grande to the Cabo de Hornos.
Aside from their wariness of the US, past Brazilian presidents also feared their domestic business establishment, which never met a tariff or a non-tariff barrier it did not like.
That protectionist sentiment, always strongest in the industrial heartland of São Paulo, is still there.
But with Brazil just beginning to emerge from its deepest recession in decades, Brazilian businesses are eagerly seeking new customers.
And with China slowing, Europe mired in its own crisis, and the US walling itself in, the region’s growing markets have fresh appeal.
Its leaders always talked the talk of regional free trade, but no Sherlock Holmes was needed to discover that their real interest lay in the US market, where over 80% of Mexican exports go.
Now that Trump has called Mexican immigrants rapists and has called for a wall on the border (along with a tariff on Mexican exports to pay for it), trade intimacy with the US is losing – how can one put it politely? – some of its appeal.
So it should come as no surprise that Mexican politicians and businesspeople are looking south with newfound enthusiasm.
President Mauricio Macri’s year-old administration is naturally inclined toward economic liberalism, and Argentina is caught today in the straitjacket of the external tariff of the Mercosur regional trade agreement with Brazil, Paraguay, and Uruguay.
The least traumatic way to achieve greater openness without having to blow up the existing agreement is to have Mercosur join a larger free-trade area.
With Brazil, Mexico, and Argentina pushing in the same direction, the issue of leadership would be solved automatically.
Chile, which for political reasons has always wanted to bring together the more liberal economies of the Pacific with the more protectionist regimes of the Atlantic, would have plenty of reasons to help move the process forward.
And Canada, under Prime Minister Justin Trudeau (everybody’s favorite English-speaking leader nowadays), would be most welcome to join.
Yes, Venezuela’s Maduro would object and denounce a neoliberal conspiracy against him.
But, given his rock-bottom standing in the region, most countries would regard this as an additional incentive to join the new bloc.
The Pacific Alliance, which already binds together Mexico, Colombia, Chile, and Peru, is a useful starting point.
That agreement focuses on trade in goods and services, trade facilitation, rules of origin, and dispute resolution.
In any new deal, non-tariff barriers and government procurement, two sets of instruments often used for hidden and not-so-hidden protectionism in Latin America, ought to follow common standards.
The always-prickly issues of investment and intellectual property should be a part of any new deal; but, with the US absent, some of the more controversial rules that North American businesses have lobbied for could now be excluded.
So, yes, the era of free trade across much of the Americas finally may have arrived.
And we have Trump’s nationalist and protectionist bullying to thank for it.
Few Israelis expect Palestinian Prime Minister Mahmud Abbas to deliver security to Israel, or to implement far reaching political and financial reforms.
Few Palestinians expect Israeli Prime Minister Ariel Sharon to deliver what they want: a freeze on the construction and expansion of settlements, and the eventual creation of a truly sovereign Palestinian state on contiguous territory.
In a survey of Israeli and Palestinian opinion of the roadmap, Yaakov Shamir of Hebrew University and I found that only 15% of Palestinians agreed that Sharon would stand by Israel's commitments, while only 30% of Israelis believed that Abu Mazen would hold up the Palestinian end of the agreement.
Security remains the critical component in the first phase of the roadmap for both parties.
The roadmap calls upon the Palestinians to take steps that would bring violence to an end.
One early Palestinian achievement has been a ceasefire agreement among all factions, including Hamas and Islamic Jihad (although both groups claim the right to retaliate for Israel's ``targeted killings'' of their leaders).
But the roadmap stipulates that additional measures are to be taken by Palestinian authorities, including arresting individuals planning or carrying out violent attacks and the ``dismantlement of terrorist capabilities and infrastructure,'' including confiscating illegal weapons from armed groups.
The Palestinian security services are discovering that they lack the capacity to do so without risking civil war.
But even if they could disarm the extremists, Palestinians are divided about how far they are willing to go to attain security for Israel.
While the ceasefire remains popular--albeit increasingly tenuous in light of recent events--few Palestinians wish to see the Palestinian Authority permanently break the back of the armed resistance forces.
Many Palestinians view violence as a useful tool in the struggle for independence and do not want to destroy the capability to resort to arms in the future if Israel reneges on its roadmap commitment to end the occupation.
Palestinian opinion offers a different option for restraining Hamas and dismantling the ``infrastructure of violence'': incorporating Hamas and Islamic Jihad, and other factions, into the political process.
For the younger generation of Palestinian political activists, the best hope for independence lies in the emergence of an empowered young guard, incorporating both nationalists and Islamists.
These younger leaders guided the Intifada, gaining stature within Palestinian society, as well as a feeling that they might soon supplant the traditional old guard of the PLO.
Youthful nationalists believe that they will gain outright leadership among Palestinians when they convince moderate young Islamists to abandon Hamas and Islamic Jihad to join with them in ousting the old guard.
For them, such developments look like a trap that would consolidate the ``infrastructure of terror.''
They do not want to deal with the Palestinians, and so are erecting a physical barrier through areas that are now nominally under Palestinian control.
While the roadmap speaks volumes about security, it makes no mention whatsoever of the Israeli wall.
Yet the wall and the second phase of the roadmap, which calls for a Palestinian state with provisional borders, cannot co-exist.
Initially aimed at creating a security fence along the green line, the 1967 borders of Israel, it has gradually stretched across that would-be boundary, confiscating Palestinian land and amounting to a de facto annexation of a large part of the West Bank.
For example, the planned portion of the wall that reaches the settlement of Ariel, deep inside the West Bank, extends 15 kilometers inside Palestinian territories.
By encircling large parts of the West Bank from the east, covering as much as 50% of Palestinian territory, the wall deprives Palestinians of access to Jordan, their eastern neighbor.
In Palestinian eyes, the wall is a unilateral measure that creates facts on the ground and short-circuits the timing and effectiveness of so-called ``permanent status'' negotiations, which are envisaged in the third phase of the roadmap.
This is because the second phase, which still has to be achieved, calls for a Palestinian state with contiguous but provisional borders.
So continuing its construction will kill any Palestinian enthusiasm for the second phase of the roadmap.
Instead, Israelis will have a strong incentive to demand an immediate implementation of the third phase, in other words, to go directly to ``permanent status'' talks.
Permanent status negotiations, dealing with all the major issues of the conflict--including refugees, Jerusalem, settlement, security, water, and, of course, the permanent borders of the Palestinian state--are scheduled to be completed by the end of 2005, while Ariel Sharon is still slated to be Prime Minister.
Immediate resumption of these talks will lead to profound Palestinian despair, much deeper than the disillusion that followed the collapse of the Camp David summit in July 2000.
The roadmap, with its promise of fast achievements in the form of an Israeli settlement freeze and early Palestinian statehood, provides incentives for the Palestinian Authority to deliver security for Israelis on a sustained basis.
If Israel must have its wall, it must also restrict it to the 1967 Green Line.
LONDON – When the United Kingdom announced earlier this month that it had agreed to become a founding member of the China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), most of the headlines focused not on the news itself, but on the friction the decision had caused between the UK and the United States.
The White House issued a statement urging the British government to “use its voice to push for adoption of high standards."
And one senior US administration official was quoted accusing the UK of “constant accommodation of China, which is not the best way to engage a rising power."
In the UK, the diplomatic spat served as an occasion for the British press to air criticism from those who believe that the government should adopt a stronger stance on China.
For example, they say that the government should have spoken out more forcefully in support of last year's pro-democracy protests in Hong Kong, and that it should not have distanced itself from the Dalai Lama (as it seems to have done) during Prime Minister David Cameron's visit to China in 2013.
The UK does need to stand up for itself, but there is no reason for it to become confrontational about internal Chinese matters – especially in the case of Hong Kong, where it lost its standing when it agreed to return the city to Chinese control in 1997.
The US, too, would be wise to stop resisting the fact that the world is changing.
The US Congress has yet to ratify a 2010 agreement providing China and other large emerging economies greater voting power in the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund.
America's reluctance – and that of France, Germany, and Italy – to give the emerging powers an appropriate voice in the established international financial institutions is counterproductive.
It drives the creation of new parallel institutions such as the AIIB and the New Development Bank, founded in 2014 by the BRICS countries (Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa).
In the coming days, I will be visiting China in my role as Chair of the British government's Review on Antimicrobial Resistance, and also as a participant in the Boao Forum for Asia, an event similar to the annual gathering of the World Economic Forum in Davos.
I hope to encourage Chinese policymakers to make the fight against antimicrobial resistance a priority when China chairs the G-20 in 2016.
And though I am not the British ambassador, I will be happy to state my belief that the UK government was wise to join the AIIB, and that the US administration, in voicing its opposition, was not.
China's $10 trillion economy is bigger than those of France, Germany, and Italy combined.
Even if its annual output growth slows to 7%, the country will add some $700 billion to global GDP this year.
Japan would have to grow at something like 14% to have that type of impact on the world.
For anyone who wants to engage in global trade, it is thus vital to identify what China wants.
In the case of the UK, this obviously includes finance (as well as sports, music, fashion, and perhaps health care).
The UK is simply being smart when it promotes its own interests by cooperating with China.
One of the few positive consequences of the 2008 financial crisis was the elevation of the G-20's global role; in principle, it is a far more representative forum for international leadership than the G-7 ever was.
There is, however, a downside to the G-20's emergence: the large number of participants can make it difficult to reach agreements and get things done.
A new G-7 needs to be created within the G-20, thereby providing China with a degree of influence that reflects its economic weight and requires it to assume a commensurate proportion of global responsibility.
Space at the table for China could be obtained if the eurozone countries, signaling their commitment to the common currency, agreed to surrender their individual seats in exchange for one representing the entire monetary union.
The US, too, would finally have to accept China's heightened global role.
Later this year, the IMF will recalibrate the weights in its unit of account, the so-called Special Drawing Rights, which comprises a basket of currencies that currently includes the US dollar, the euro, the British pound, and the Japanese yen.
According to almost every economic and financial criterion, the SDR basket should now include China's renminbi.
Similarly, the US Congress should ratify the agreed changes to the governance of the IMF and the World Bank.
By founding the AIIB and the New Development Bank, China and other emerging powers have signaled that they will not wait for their voices to be better heard.
And decisions like that of the UK – and France, Germany, and Italy – show that they are not alone.
NEW YORK – Just a few years ago, a powerful ideology – the belief in free and unfettered markets – brought the world to the brink of ruin.
Even in its hey-day, from the early 1980’s until 2007, American-style deregulated capitalism brought greater material well-being only to the very richest in the richest country of the world.
Indeed, over the course of this ideology’s 30-year ascendance, most Americans saw their incomes decline or stagnate year after year.
With so much of US national income going to so few, growth could continue only through consumption financed by a mounting pile of debt.
I was among those who hoped that, somehow, the financial crisis would teach Americans (and others) a lesson about the need for greater equality, stronger regulation, and a better balance between the market and government.
On the contrary, a resurgence of right-wing economics, driven, as always, by ideology and special interests, once again threatens the global economy – or at least the economies of Europe and America, where these ideas continue to flourish.
In the US, this right-wing resurgence, whose adherents evidently seek to repeal the basic laws of math and economics, is threatening to force a default on the national debt.
If Congress mandates expenditures that exceed revenues, there will be a deficit, and that deficit has to be financed.
Rather than carefully balancing the benefits of each government expenditure program with the costs of raising taxes to finance those benefits, the right seeks to use a sledgehammer – not allowing the national debt to increase forces expenditures to be limited to taxes.
This leaves open the question of which expenditures get priority – and if expenditures to pay interest on the national debt do not, a default is inevitable.
Moreover, to cut back expenditures now, in the midst of an ongoing crisis brought on by free-market ideology, would inevitably simply prolong the downturn.
A decade ago, in the midst of an economic boom, the US faced a surplus so large that it threatened to eliminate the national debt.
Unaffordable tax cuts and wars, a major recession, and soaring health-care costs – fueled in part by the commitment of George W. Bush’s administration to giving drug companies free rein in setting prices, even with government money at stake – quickly transformed a huge surplus into record peacetime deficits.
The remedies to the US deficit follow immediately from this diagnosis: put America back to work by stimulating the economy; end the mindless wars; rein in military and drug costs; and raise taxes, at least on the very rich.
But the right will have none of this, and instead is pushing for even more tax cuts for corporations and the wealthy, together with expenditure cuts in investments and social protection that put the future of the US economy in peril and that shred what remains of the social contract.
Meanwhile, the US financial sector has been lobbying hard to free itself of regulations, so that it can return to its previous, disastrously carefree, ways.
As Greece and others face crises, the medicine du jour is simply timeworn austerity packages and privatization, which will merely leave the countries that embrace them poorer and more vulnerable.
This medicine failed in East Asia, Latin America, and elsewhere, and it will fail in Europe this time around, too.
There is an alternative: an economic-growth strategy supported by the European Union and the International Monetary Fund.
Growth would restore confidence that Greece could repay its debts, causing interest rates to fall and leaving more fiscal room for further growth-enhancing investments.
Growth itself increases tax revenues and reduces the need for social expenditures, such as unemployment benefits.
Regrettably, the financial markets and right-wing economists have gotten the problem exactly backwards: they believe that austerity produces confidence, and that confidence will produce growth.
But austerity undermines growth, worsening the government’s fiscal position, or at least yielding less improvement than austerity’s advocates promise.
On both counts, confidence is undermined, and a downward spiral is set in motion.
We shouldn’t, but increasingly it appears that we will have to endure another one nonetheless.
A failure of either Europe or the US to return to robust growth would be bad for the global economy.
A failure in both would be disastrous – even if the major emerging-market countries have attained self-sustaining growth.
Unfortunately, unless wiser heads prevail, that is the way the world is heading.
BERKELEY – Zhou Xiaochuan, the governor of the People’s Bank of China, made a splash prior to the recent G-20 summit by arguing that the International Monetary Fund’s Special Drawing Rights should replace the dollar as the world’s reserve currency.
Sympathizers acknowledged the contradictions of a system in which a national unit is used internationally.
But if those reserves mainly take the form of dollars, then their rising demand allows the United States to finance its external deficit at an artificially low cost.
In turn, this allows unsustainable imbalances to build up, leading to an inevitable crash.
Recent events have highlighted this problem – and Governor Zhou thus was right to call for a different system.
But skeptics question whether the SDR could ever replace the dollar as the world’s leading reserve currency, for the simple reason that the SDR is not a currency.
It is a composite accounting unit in which the IMF issues credits to its members.
Those credits can be converted into dollars and other currencies at the Fund, and can be used in official transactions among IMF member countries.
But they cannot be used in the other transactions in which central banks and governments engage.
They cannot be used to intervene in foreign-exchange markets, or in other transactions with market participants.
Despite the trials and tribulations of the American economy, dollar securities remain the dominant form of reserves because of the unparalleled depth and liquidity of US markets.
There is also the convenience factor: dollars are widely used in a variety of other transactions.
As a result, not even the euro has seriously challenged the dollar as the dominant reserve currency.
If China is serious about elevating the SDR to reserve-currency status, it should take steps to create a liquid market in SDR claims.
They would pay a price, since investors in these bonds would initially demand a novelty premium.
Of course, an earlier attempt was made to create a commercial market in SDR-denominated claims.
Back in the 1970’s, there was some limited issuance of SDR-denominated liabilities by commercial banks and SDR-denominated bonds by corporations.
The dollar being more liquid, its first-mover advantage proved impossible to surmount.
Overcoming that advantage now would require someone to act as market-maker for private as well as official transactions and subsidize the market in its start-up phase.
The Fund could stand ready to buy and sell SDR claims to all comers, private as well as official, at narrow bid/ask spreads competitive with those for dollars.
The dollar originally acquired international currency status in the 1920’s, when the newly established Federal Reserve started buying and selling dollar acceptances, backstopping the market and enhancing its liquidity.
If the international community is serious about the SDR as an international currency, it will have to empower the IMF to do likewise.
The IMF would be using real resources to subsidize the market until private market-makers saw it as attractive to provide those services at comparable cost.
But, again, what is this if not an investment in a more stable global monetary system?
Transforming the SDR into a true international currency would require surmounting other obstacles.
The IMF would have to be able to issue additional SDRs in periods of shortage, as when the Fed provided dollar swaps to ensure adequate dollar liquidity in the second half of 2008.
At the moment, countries holding 85% of IMF voting power must agree before SDRs can be issued, which is no recipe for liquidity.
The IMF’s management would also have to be empowered to decide on SDR issuance, just as the Fed can decide to offer currency swaps.
For the SDR to become a true international currency, in other words, the IMF would have to become more like a global central bank and international lender of last resort.
NEW DELHI – Japanese Emperor Akihito and Empress Michiko, in a rare overseas trip, are scheduled to begin a tour of the Indian cities of New Delhi and Chennai on November 30.
The imperial couple’s weeklong visit is likely to mark a defining moment in Indo-Japanese relations, fostering closer economic and security ties between Asia’s two leading democracies as they seek a pluralistic, stable Asian order.
Traditionally, a visit from the Japanese emperor – except for a coronation or royal anniversary celebration – signified a turning point in a bilateral relationship.
While the emperor is merely the “symbol of the state” under Japan’s US-imposed postwar constitution, he retains significant influence, owing to Japanese veneration of the imperial dynasty – the world’s oldest continuous hereditary monarchy, the origins of which can be traced to 660 BC.
Indeed, the emperor’s overseas visits remain deeply political, setting the tone – if not the agenda – for Japan’s foreign policy.
Consider Akihito’s 1992 visit to China – the first such visit by any Japanese emperor.
Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping’s government – grateful for Japan’s reluctance to maintain punitive sanctions over the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre and eager for international recognition, not to mention Japanese capital and commercial technologies – had extended seven invitations over two years.
Akihito’s trip, which came at the height of Japan’s pro-China foreign policy, was followed by increased Japanese aid, investment, and technology transfer, thereby cementing Japan’s role in China’s economic rise.
The improved diplomatic relationship lasted until the recent flare-up of territorial and other bilateral disputes.
In traditional Japanese culture, India is Tenjiku (the country of heaven).
Today, Japan is India’s largest source of aid and has secured a key role in supporting infrastructure development, financing projects like the Western Dedicated Freight Corridor, the Delhi-Mumbai Industrial Corridor, and the Bangalore Metro Rail Project.
With these natural allies seeking to add strategic bulk to their rapidly multiplying ties, Akihito’s tour is the most significant visit to India by any foreign leader in recent years.
Indeed, it is expected to be one of the last foreign trips for the 79-year-old emperor, who has undergone several major surgeries in the past decade.
Akihito’s travel schedule contrasts sharply with that of Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh.
Despite having had open-heart surgery during his first term, India’s 81-year-old leader has sought to offset his low domestic political stock by flying more than one million kilometers on overseas trips – including visits to Japan, China, Indonesia, Russia, Thailand, and the United States in the last six months alone.
The paradox of Akihito’s tour – for which Singh has appointed a special envoy with ministerial rank to oversee preparations – is that Japan is investing substantial political capital to build a strong, long-term partnership with India’s government at a time when India is gripped by policy paralysis.
Japan’s leaders are perhaps counting on the continuity of India’s strategic policies, which would require the Indian government that emerges from next year’s general election to sustain the momentum of cooperation.
But, more important, Japan is adjusting to meet the challenges of a rapidly changing regional environment, characterized by rising geopolitical competition with China.
In a historical reversal, Japan has found itself on the defensive against the increasingly muscular foreign policy of its former colony and old rival.
This situation is forcing the Japanese government to reconsider its postwar pacifism, revise its defense strategy, and increase its military spending.
In this context, Japan knows that a deeper strategic collaboration with India – which is also seeking to blunt increasing military pressure from China – is its best move.
In modern history, Japan has had the distinction of consistently staying ahead of the rest of Asia.
During the Meiji era, in the second half of the nineteenth century, it became the first Asian country to modernize.
It was also the first Asian country to emerge as a world power, defeating Manchu-ruled China and Czarist Russia in separate wars.
And after its defeat in World War II, Japan rose from the ashes to become Asia’s first global economic powerhouse.
With per capita GDP of more than $37,000, Japan still ranks among the world’s richest countries, specializing in the highest-value links of global supply chains.
Nonetheless, almost two decades of economic stagnation have eroded Japan’s regional clout.
This raises the question of whether Japan’s current problems –sluggish growth, high public debt, and rapid population aging – presage a similar trend across East Asia.
Similar problems are already appearing in South Korea, while China has been driven to loosen its one-child policy and unveil plans for economic reforms aimed at reviving growth.
It is central to India’s “Look East” policy, which has evolved into more of an “Act East” policy, whereby the original strategy’s economic logic has been amplified by the larger geopolitical objective of ensuring Asian stability and a regional balance of power.
It is in this light that Akihito’s historic visit should be viewed.
CAMBRIDGE – The idea that public investment in infrastructure – roads, dams, power plants, and so forth – is an indispensable driver of economic growth has always held powerful sway over the minds of policymakers in poor countries.
It also lay behind early development assistance programs following World War II, when the World Bank and bilateral donors funneled resources to newly independent countries to finance large-scale projects.
And it motivates the new China-led Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank (AIIB), which aims to fill the region’s supposed $8 trillion infrastructure gap.
But this kind of public-investment-driven growth model – often derisively called “capital fundamentalism” – has long been out of fashion among development experts.
Since the 1970s, economists have been advising policymakers to de-emphasize the public sector, physical capital, and infrastructure, and to prioritize private markets, human capital (skills and training), and reforms in governance and institutions.
If one looks at the countries that, despite strengthening global economic headwinds, are still growing very rapidly, one will find public investment is doing a lot of the work.
In Africa, Ethiopia is the most astounding success story of the last decade.
Its economy has grown at an average annual rate exceeding 10% since 2004, which has translated into significant poverty reduction and improved health outcomes.
The country is resource-poor and did not benefit from commodity booms, unlike many of its continental peers.
Nor did economic liberalization and structural reforms of the type typically recommended by the World Bank and other donors play much of a role.
Rapid growth was the result, instead, of a massive increase in public investment, from 5% of GDP in the early 1990s to 19% in 2011 – the third highest rate in the world.
The Ethiopian government went on a spending spree, building roads, railways, power plants, and an agricultural extension system that significantly enhanced productivity in rural areas, where most of the poor reside.
Expenditures were financed partly by foreign aid and partly by heterodox policies (such as financial repression) that channeled private saving to the government.
In India, rapid growth is also underpinned by a substantial increase in investment, which now stands at around one-third of GDP.
Much of this increase has come from private sources, reflecting gradual relaxation of the shackles on the business sector since the early 1980s.
The government has had to step in as both private investment and total factor productivity growth have faltered in recent years.
These days, it is public infrastructure investment that helps maintain India’s growth momentum.
“I think two sectors holding back the economy are private investments and exports,” says the government’s chief economic adviser, Arvind Subramanian.
Turning to Latin America, Bolivia is one of the rare mineral exporters that has managed to avoid others’ fate in the current commodity-price downturn.
Annual GDP growth is expected to remain above 4% in 2015, in a region where overall output is shrinking (by 0.3%, according to the International Monetary Fund’s latest projections).
Much of that has to do with public investment, which President Evo Morales regards as the engine of the Bolivian economy.
From 2005 to 2014, total public investment has more than doubled relative to national income, from 6% to 13%, and the government intends to push the ratio even higher in coming years.
We know that hikes in public investment, just like commodity booms, all too often end in tears.
The economic and social returns decline and money dries up, setting the stage for a debt crisis.
A recent IMF study finds that, after some early positive effects, most public-investment drives falter.
Public investment can enhance an economy’s productivity for a substantial period of time, even a decade or more, as it clearly has done in Ethiopia.
It can also catalyze private investment, and there is some evidence that this has happened in India in recent years.
In fact, today it may be the advanced economies of North America and Western Europe that stand to gain the most from ramping up domestic public investment.
In the aftermath of the great recession, there are many ways in which these economies could put additional public spending to good use: to increase demand and employment, restore crumbling infrastructure, and boost research and development, particularly in green technologies.
Such arguments are typically countered in policy debates by objections related to fiscal balance and macroeconomic stability.
But public investment is different from other types of official outlays, such as expenditures on public-sector wages or social transfers.
So long as the return on those assets exceeds the cost of funds, public investment in fact strengthens the government’s balance sheet.
We do not know how the experiments in Ethiopia, India, or Bolivia will eventually turn out; so caution is warranted before one extrapolates from these to other cases.
Nonetheless, all three are examples that other countries, including developed ones, should watch closely as they search for viable growth strategies in an increasingly hostile global economic environment.
TEL AVIV – The collapse of yet another attempt by the United States to broker an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement should do more than provoke finger-pointing.
It should spur a fundamental reconsideration of a paradigm of peacemaking – direct bilateral negotiations, under US guidance – that lost its relevance long ago.
While the US remains an indispensable global actor, it is no longer willing to use coercive diplomacy in its quest to build a new order.
But it is not just a matter of willingness; the US has lost its ability to intimidate other countries, even allies and clients like Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
In the Middle East alone, the US has overstretched its capabilities in two controversial wars; repeatedly failed to broker a peace between Israel and Palestine; estranged key regional powers; and performed disappointingly on issues like Iran’s nuclear program and Syria’s civil war.
Despite its professed strategic pivot toward Asia, US President Barack Obama’s administration has done little to address China’s increasingly assertive efforts to stake its territorial claims in the South and East China Seas or North Korea’s affronts to the status quo on the Korean Peninsula.
Add to that America’s weak response to Russia’s annexation of Crimea, and it is no wonder that Israeli and Palestinian leaders have dismissed its peace overtures.
US Secretary of State John Kerry, in his bid for an Israeli-Palestinian settlement, operated as if conflict resolution could be achieved through non-coercive solutions, deriving from the good will of the relevant parties.
According to this plainly naive approach, the negotiation process operates according to its own embedded logic, independent of considerations of power, coercion, and leverage.
But treating force and diplomacy as distinct phases of foreign policy gives the negotiating parties the sense that American power lacks purpose and resolve.
Diplomatic ripening sometimes requires the mediator to be a manipulator and an arm-twister.
Indeed, America’s only successful attempts at peace diplomacy in the Middle East involved a masterly combination of power, manipulation, and pressure.
Secretary of State Henry Kissinger used it to lead Israel toward groundbreaking interim settlements with Egypt and Syria following the 1973 Yom Kippur War.
President Jimmy Carter used it to conclude the 1978 Camp David Accords, establishing diplomatic relations between Egypt and Israel.
And Secretary of State James Baker used it to overcome the recalcitrance of Israeli Prime Minister Yitzhak Shamir during the 1991 Madrid Peace Conference.
If the US cannot provide this today, it must relinquish its monopoly on international conflict resolution.
It is time for the US to recognize that it cannot resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, defuse the Iranian nuclear dispute, change North Korea’s behavior, or stop the Syrian civil war on its own.
Over the last two decades, the world grew accustomed to US-led international coalitions for war in the Middle East.
America should now try to form a different kind of coalition – one aimed at achieving peace.
Such an alliance would entail a larger role for the other three members of the so-called “Middle East Quartet” – the European Union, Russia, and the United Nations – and key Arab countries.
Within this new peace paradigm, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict would become amenable to a truly international solution.
If Iran’s nuclear program demands negotiations with the five permanent members of the UN Security Council, plus Germany, and North Korea’s requires the so-called “six-party talks,” why should the resolution of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict be left exclusively to the US?
As if the Israeli-Palestinian conflict’s depth and duration were not enough to merit an international solution, there is also the issue of Palestine’s mistrust of the US.
For Palestinians, the US – a staunch ally of Israel whose leaders have strong domestic political incentives not to challenge it – cannot act as an honest broker in negotiations.
Under a truly international paradigm, the principles underlying a peace deal – two states along the 1967 border (with territorial swaps to accommodate Israel’s settlement blocs), two capitals in Jerusalem, an agreed solution to the refugee problem, and robust security arrangements – could be enshrined in a Security Council resolution.
After establishing the terms of a fair deal, the international alliance – under US leadership – could devise an implementation strategy.
Such an international approach would also require a broader peace process, aimed at achieving a regional settlement between Israel and its Arab neighbors.
This is critical, because the future Palestinian state could not offer Israel much security.
Even now, Palestine is a relatively minor security challenge for Israel; the more formidable threats, which have compelled Israel to build up its military considerably, come from the Arab states that surround it.
The promise of a regional settlement that offers Israel the needed security guarantee – not to mention a considerable boost to its international standing – would make the painful concessions, including compromises on borders and Jerusalem, which are critical to the creation of a Palestinian state, more digestible for Israeli leaders.
The initiators of the 2002 Arab Peace Initiative understood this; perhaps now the US will come to appreciate it as well.
WASHINGTON, DC – For the last few years, economists have been running through the alphabet to describe the shape of the long-awaited recovery – starting with an optimistic V, proceeding to a more downbeat U, and ending up at a despairing W. But now a deeper anxiety is beginning to stalk the profession: the fear of what I call an “L-shaped” recovery.
Viewed in the light of the past five dismal years, 2013 was not bad for the advanced economies.
The eurozone technically emerged from recession, the unemployment rate in the United States was lower than in previous years, and Japan began to stir after a long slumber and the negative shock of the earthquake and tsunami in 2011.
But if we look beneath the surface, it becomes evident that we are still hovering on the edge of a precipice.
In the third quarter of this year, GDP contracted, on a year-on-year basis, not just in well-known cases like Greece and Portugal, but also in Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, and the Czech Republic.
And GDP in some countries, like France and Sweden, grew at rates lower than population growth, implying that per capita income declined.
But, even there, while the unemployment rate has dropped during the year, and now stands at 7%, long-term joblessness is at an unusually high 36% of total unemployment, threatening to erode the skills base and make recovery that much more difficult.
Japan’s revival, meanwhile, was caused by a much-needed liquidity injection.
But Japan’s upturn will be short-lived unless Prime Minister Shinzo Abe’s government follows through on its promise of deeper structural reforms.
Given these developments, a few commentators have written recently about the possibility of a prolonged slowdown in industrialized countries.
This is not a popular view, with others criticizing its advocates for stoking pessimism.
Modern technology has enabled workers in emerging economies to join a global labor market; in the absence of major policy innovation, this is likely to cause a prolonged drag on rich countries.
There is, instead, a crisis of the economics profession, one that mirrors the crisis of the advanced economies.
Thanks to technological change and relentless globalization, the character of entire economies has changed dramatically over the last 50 years.
One possibility is that the same factors that are making entrepreneurs over-cautious about new ventures are making policymakers prone to conservatism.
An engaging paper by the World Bank economists Leora Klapper and Inessa Love shows that one major consequence of the financial crisis has been entrepreneurs’ reluctance to start new firms.
They show that after a steady increase from 2004 to 2007, firm creation dropped sharply.
In the United Kingdom, for example, the number of newly registered limited-liability companies fell from 450,000 in 2007 to 372,000 in 2008 and 330,000 in 2009.
What is interesting is that while this decline is most marked in advanced economies, which are especially dependent on financial markets, it is visible in virtually all of the 95 countries that the authors studied.
The reason is not hard to fathom: A recession is a time when we tend to become cautious and stick to familiar territory, steering clear of new projects.
In times of profound uncertainty, the tendency is to cling to the domain of the familiar and avoid innovative thinking.
This is especially unfortunate nowadays, when the structure of the global economy is changing rapidly.
A telltale sign of over-caution among economists and policymakers has been their propensity to convert the need for evidence to an aversion to analytical creativity.
In these uncharted territories, one must rely on a combination of intuition and theory.
To resist new policy on the grounds that it is not founded in hard evidence is to trap us in the status quo.
To see the mistake in this criticism, imagine that, on the basis of theory and some assumptions, one recommends new policy X, even though there is no hard evidence regarding whether or not X works.
If there is no evidence regarding whether X works, there clearly is no evidence concerning whether Y works.
So, if the lack of evidence is considered a good reason not to do X, it is also a good reason not to do Y. But this is a contradiction, because it is impossible not to do either X or Y.
The propensity to use this inconsistent argument reflects a proclivity for the status quo and a bias against policy innovation.
But what we need now is precisely the type of new analytical thinking that spurred the great advances of economics as a discipline over the last two and a half centuries – and that led to major policy breakthroughs during the Great Depression.
It is the absence of such creative thinking that has led the economics profession into an impasse, forcing economists and policymakers to contend with the fear of “L.”
TEL AVIV – Nobody should be surprised that Scotland’s recent referendum on independence left the United Kingdom intact.
In the past, regions or communities have achieved statehood almost exclusively after a struggle against colonial subjection and oppression, galvanized by an appeal to a distinctive religious, cultural, or ethnic identity.
Complaints about economic dynamics, social policies, or governance inefficiencies – the basis of Scotland’s “yes” campaign – are not the cris de coeur of a successful independence movement.
As the movement’s leader, Alex Salmond, acknowledged in a 2012 consultation document, “Scotland is not oppressed and we have no need to be liberated.”
The struggle for independence, he explained, was aimed at creating the kind of efficient administrative and economic structures that would enable Scotland to reach its potential.
The “yes” campaign hoped to win supporters with a utopian vision of an independent Scotland that included European Union and NATO membership; a currency union with England, but no fiscal union; improved public services and social benefits; and lower taxes.
In other words, Scotland would have everything it has now, only better, and on its own terms.
But it proved significantly less compelling than the economic doomsday scenarios advanced by its unionist opponents, including former US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, former World Bank President Robert Zoellick, and Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne.
In other words, many people’s votes were driven by risk aversion, fear, and intimidation, rather than hope, passion, or deep emotional attachment to a common identity.
This contrasts sharply with the motivations espoused by Scotland’s nobles in the fourteenth century, when they succeeded in preserving their country’s independence from English rule.
“It is in truth not for glory, nor riches, nor honors that we are fighting,” they declared, “but for freedom alone, which no honest man gives up but with life itself.”
In fact, the “no” campaign’s victory might have been even more resounding if the Westminster establishment’s desperate, last-minute offer to grant Scotland more powers on taxation, spending, and welfare had been included as an option in the ballot.
National movements driven by a historical mission or an uncompromising quest to assert group identity against a dominant power normally do not succumb to economic considerations and last-minute economic bait.
It was none other than the founder of the Zionist fundamentalist right, Ze’ev Jabotinsky, who warned in 1924 against “the naive assumption that the aspiration of the Palestinians…will be paralyzed by such means as subsidies, economic advantages, or bribery.”
Recognizing that their “natural patriotism is pure and noble,” he knew that they could not be “bought off.”
Now, Salmond is probably re-thinking his avoidance of nativist identity politics.
What Edmund Burke defined as a group’s attachment to “the inns and resting places of the human spirit” – that is, ethnic, religious, and community ties – would have been a much more powerful mobilizing force for an independence movement.
The “yes” campaigners would not have had to look far for inspiration.
James Joyce – himself not devoid of traces of Irish nationalism – wrote that “nationality, language, [and] religion” are “the nets” into which “a man is born.”
Similarly, George Orwell distinguished between Celtic nationalism and Anglophobia, stating that the former is belief “in the past and future greatness of the Celtic peoples.”
True, Scotland’s great minds in the age of Enlightenment, such as David Hume, Adam Smith, and even the national poet, Robert Burns, were all fervent advocates of “Britishness,” whatever that might mean today.
Yet an identity-based campaign could have resorted to the heritage of the Scottish Renaissance of the mid-twentieth century or to the Celtic Revival and Celtic Twilight movements, which awakened a spirit of cultural nationalism among Scots in the late nineteenth century.
In the run-up to the referendum, Scotland’s independence movement became an important point of reference for Catalans and Basques in Spain, the Flemish in Belgium, the Veneto and South Tyrol regions in Italy, Corsicans and Bretons in France, and the secessionists of Quebec.
All hoped that Scotland would pave the way for the peaceful breakup of their own states.
With the defeat of Scotland’s independence movement – not to mention Québécois voters’ stunning rejection of the province’s largest separatist party in last April’s election – that hope may be waning.
There is little historical precedent for the peaceful breakup of a state, with an exception like Czechoslovakia’s consensual split in 1993 occurring in unique circumstances.
The United States and Spain did it in their civil wars, and today’s Spain would go to the outer limits of its capacity to prevent a Catalan or Basque referendum, let alone independence.
Theirs is the nationalism of free, liberated people, who can expect the most generous devolution deals possible to protect their singular legacies and address their grievances.
And perhaps that is why federal arrangements like those in Australia and Canada – essentially what Westminster grudgingly offered Scotland – could be their best option.
BRUSSELS – Vladimir Putin’s return to the Kremlin as Russia’s president was always a foregone conclusion.
But, when he is sworn in on May 7, he will retake formal charge of a country whose politics – even Putin’s own political future – has turned unpredictable.
Putin’s return to the presidency, following a period of de facto control as prime minister, was supposed to signify a reassuring continuation of “business as usual” – a strong, orderly state devoid of the potentially destabilizing effects of multiparty democracy and bickering politicians.
Their reaction to Putin’s plan – from the announcement last September that President Dmitri Medvedev would stand aside for his mentor, to the deeply flawed parliamentary and presidential elections – and their accumulated resentment of Kremlin cronies’ massive enrichment, has placed pressure on Putin and the top-down system of government that he created.
How Putin, an astute politician, responds to that pressure will determine his political legacy.
And the West’s response to Putin’s return to the presidency could have a marked effect on whether he presses for liberalizing reforms and survives, or follows his KGB-honed authoritarian instincts and stokes further protest.
Nothing illustrates Russia’s malaise under Putin better than the case of Sergei Magnitsky, a lawyer working for a British investment fund.
His reward for exposing this crime was to be imprisoned and mistreated until he died in mysterious circumstances.
The Russian authorities are bizarrely continuing to prosecute him posthumously, as well as continuing to carry out the tax scams that he exposed.
The United States Congress is currently debating a law that would impose asset freezes and visa bans on the 60 people identified as having had some responsibility for Magnitsky's detention and death.
Many of the law’s supporters want it to replace the so-called Jackson-Vanik amendment, a Cold War-era law that restricts US trade with Russia – and that the Obama administration is pushing to repeal.
Such a change would be doubly beneficial: it would both enhance trade and hold to account people responsible for egregious human-rights abuses.
Meanwhile, in the United Kingdom, the House of Commons recently passed a resolution along the same lines as the proposed US legislation.
London is a favorite destination for wealthy Russians, and the British government is now considering whether to support such an initiative, although there are indications that it will maintain an unofficial and unpublished list of the banned individuals in order to forestall legal challenges.
In Ottawa, the Canadian parliament has called for similar measures, including asset freezes against those responsible for Magnitsky's death, as has the European Parliament, which has called for the European Union’s member states to take collective action.
Introducing such targeted sanctions would be an indisputable sign that the West will not compromise on its fundamental values – values that Putin’s Russia claims to share.
It would also set a precedent that could be extended to all of those in Russia and other countries who regularly violate human rights, and not just those rights concerning physical inviolability.
For example, such measures could be extended to cover all of those who abuse the fundamental right of legal due process, such as the right to a fair trial.
Doing so would highlight the famous case of former oil magnate Mikhail Khodorkovsky, whose political ambitions alone landed him in prison, and who has been declared, after a second trial, a prisoner of conscience by Amnesty International.
Such measures could also include the abuse of prisoners’ rights, such as the case of Khodorkovsky’s former legal counsel Vasily Alexanyan, who was denied treatment for HIV in jail, and was released only after the intervention of the European Court of Human Rights.
Medvedev’s announcement one day after Putin’s election on March 5 that the Khodorkovsky case will be reviewed is a hopeful start.
Imposing travel sanctions on suspected human-rights abusers is a sensible and practical way forward.
It would show that the West does not seek to punish Russia or Russians generally, but only those individuals about whose role in human-rights violations the West has good evidence.
And it would remind Russia of its international legal obligations, specifically as a member of both the OSCE and the Council of Europe, which has 47 member states, including Russia and others who flout some its conventions.
In the past, Putin successfully marketed himself as a strongman, the epitome of stability, a guarantor against chaos.
But now Putin’s style of government is Russia’s primary source of instability, as the country’s middle class takes to the streets in protest against the corruption and inefficiency of his rule.
The West has an opportunity – and an obligation – to convince Putin that protecting his own interests requires profound and permanent democratic reform in Russia, starting with an unambiguous commitment to the rule of law.
And Putin has a rare opportunity, as he begins his third term as President, to restore his deeply tarnished reputation.
LONDON – One truism of the last three decades is that emerging markets are a leveraged play on global growth: they outperform when developed economies are growing, but they are susceptible to sharp downturns when global conditions are less favorable.
But when considering emerging-market investment opportunities in the years ahead, one must also understand the changes that have followed developed-market financial crises and a larger shift in the geopolitical landscape.
On one hand, many emerging economies have become more resilient and are no longer simply riding on developed markets’ coattails.
On the other hand, juxtaposed against these positive developments are a fresh set of challenges, namely increasingly pro-cyclical liquidity provision by market makers, the rise of populism, and a temptation to rely on currency depreciation as a substitute for structural reforms.
In light of these new realities, the sell-off of emerging-market assets this year actually means that value and risks are better aligned.
To be sure, the many risks facing emerging markets still call for a highly differentiated stance, as market illiquidity can magnify the impact of shocks on prices.
Yet, in addition to higher yields, three secular trends underpin the case for investing in emerging markets across global business cycles.
First, emerging-market economies have climbed up the development and ratings scales over the past few decades, reducing significantly their dependence on foreign borrowing.
Second, most emerging markets have moved to floating exchange rates, which help to cushion growth from external shocks such as unanticipated monetary-policy tightening in the United States.
And, most important, most emerging-market central banks, having established strong track records of meeting inflation targets, no longer have to counter large exchange-rate depreciations with draconian interest-rate hikes.
As such, domestic bond markets are better insulated, which in turn allows governments to make use of counter-cyclical fiscal policies to stabilize growth and service debts.
For starters, monetary-policy normalization in the developed economies – a process that has now been underway for 30 months in the US – looks likely to continue at a slow pace, owing to adverse demographics, high debt levels, and weak productivity growth.
Low equilibrium interest rates are an important anchor for local and external debt prices in emerging markets.
At the same time, emerging-market growth should start to become less sensitive to US interest rates and the dollar,given lower external borrowing needs, the relative lack of borrowing in dollars specifically, and reduced dependence on commodity exports.
While Argentina and Turkey are noteworthy exceptions, most major emerging-market economies have been liberated from the “original sin” of issuing dollar-denominated debt, and thus can borrow in their own currency.
That said, each of these trends has implications that must also be factored into investment decisions.
For starters, while liberation from the “original sin” mitigates the need to tighten policy pro-cyclically during externally driven shocks, it also means that the burden of any requisite adjustments will fall disproportionately on exchange rates, rather than on domestic interest rates.
As a result, exchange-rate depreciation could mitigate the fallout for growth, particularly in countries with credible inflation-targeting regimes.
Second, weaker potential growth – the counterpart to lower equilibrium interest rates – has created fertile ground for populism in countries lacking robust institutions.
So, while risks may be lower on average for emerging markets, this tail risk remains high.
Third, while the relative illiquidity of emerging markets has always demanded extra care, the liquidity risk premium for emerging-market assets may be more pro-cyclical than in the past.
At the same time that regulatory changes have reduced the intermediation capacity of traditional liquidity providers, new, computer-driven intermediaries with negligible capital buffers have made it easier to flee the market when volatility rises.
Finally, the success of emerging markets in floating their exchange rates, combined with the low-growth environment, has indirectly led to a proliferation of nationalist, protectionist policies in the developed economies.
With faster global growth, exchange rates would bear the burden of domestic macro adjustments, and allow for a re-slicing of the (larger) growth pie through currency movements.
But with the growth potential now lower, political sensitivities to exchange rate-driven adjustments are more pronounced.
This raises the risk of a feedback loop between emerging-market currency depreciations and developed-market political responses, which include tariffs and other trade measures designed to protect a shrinking pie.
Worse still, such vicious cycles are difficult to break, because emerging-market currencies typically weaken when growth is threatened.
Today, the hierarchy of emerging-market assets has been flipped on its head.
In the past, emerging-market governments defended exchange-rate pegs, which meant that stress was borne first by local interest rates rising sharply, and then through wider external debt spreads as currency pegs came under pressure.
Now, currencies are the primary buffers mitigating the fallout on emerging-market debt and growth.
This may imply larger, but less disruptive, currency adjustments than in the past.
From an investment perspective, the good news is that the traditional perils of investing in emerging markets have been mitigated.
Many emerging markets have become less vulnerable to external financing shocks and the threat of sharp, unanticipated changes in developed-economy monetary policies.
Despite lower potential growth and equilibrium interest rates in developed economies, average absolute returns for emerging markets may be no lower than in the past.
The bad news is that liquidity disruptions are likely to occur more frequently, requiring careful attention to the size of illiquid exposures in periods of low volatility.
Lower potential growth also raises the risk of populist policies, which would most likely have to be offset with higher spreads.
Remember the East Asia crisis? when the US Treasury and its IMF allies blamed that region's problems on crony capitalism, lack of transparency, and poor corporate governance?
Countries were told to follow the American model, use American auditing firms, bring in American entrepreneurs to teach them how to run their companies.
(Never mind that under the leadership of their own entrepreneurs East Asia grew faster than any other region - and with greater stability - over the previous three decades.)
The unfolding Enron scandal brings new meaning to two favorite American sayings: ``What goes around comes around,'' and ``People in glass houses shouldn't throw stones.''
Enron used fancy accounting tricks and complicated financial products (derivatives) to mislead investors about its value.
It used its money to buy influence and power, shape U.S. energy policy, and avoid regulations.
Crony capitalism is not new; nor is it the province of a single party.
Former US Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin reportedly tried to influence the current government to intervene on behalf of Enron in its hotly contested dispute in India.
In office, he had intervened when the supposedly independent board for setting accounting standards tried to clean up the accounting of senior executives' share options.
Partly thanks to him, this effort to make corporate accounting more transparent was stymied.
America's willingness to provide multi-billion dollar bail-outs to airlines or to create cartels to protect its steel and aluminum industries suggests that free market ideology is but a thin guise for old-fashioned corporate welfare: give to those with the appropriate connections.
To some, the fact that Enron was not bailed out and the problems uncovered, is testimony to the absence of crony capitalism.
I have a different interpretation: it is testimony to the importance of a free press, which may not stop but can curtail abuses.
As the press started taking a closer look at Enron, the number of members of Congress who had accepted money from Enron became clear.
Campaign contributions were not just a matter of public spirit, but an investment.
Like many of Enron's investments, it worked well in the short run, but did not pan out in the long run.
Some concern politics: the Enron scandal strengthens the case for campaign finance reform, and the need for even stronger laws requiring public disclosure.
Democracies are undermined by corporate interests being able to, in effect, buy elections.
The Bush administration, however, refuses to disclose information which would show the role of corporate interests in setting its energy policy.
For markets to work, for the appropriate signals for efficient resource allocation to be provided, investors must have as much information as possible.
There are inherent conflicts of interest: owners and managers have a natural incentive to present a picture as rosy as possible.
But the interlinking of consulting and auditing practices puts other perverse incentives in place: an incentive to please the clients, who dislike unfavorable reports.
Arthur Levitt, the former Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, recognized the conflict: as many within the auditing firms focus on their own short-term interests, the integrity of the audits could be compromised.
But the auditing firms and their corporate clients - not surprisingly, given the cabal that developed - roundly attacked his proposal for separating consulting from auditing.
What Levitt grasped - and what the Enron debacle shows so clearly - is that incentives matter, but that unfettered markets by themselves may not provide the right incentives.
Markets may not provide incentives for wealth creation; they may provide incentives for the kind of shenanigans Enron pursued.
The new economy - and its complicated new financial instruments - enhance the problems of reliable accounting frameworks; they make it easier to obfuscate.
Rather than facing up to the issues, corporate America systematically turns its back - aided and abetted by crony capitalism, American style.
The central issue of our time is finding the right balance between the government and the market.
The status quo will argue that Enron is an exception: that its demise was due to fraud, that we have laws against fraud, and that those who violate these laws should and will bear the consequences.
Its auditors claim that its central practices were within the law; that thousands of firms do the same.
Investors need assurance that information received adequately reflects the economic situation of a firm.
Within the current regulatory and legal environment, with derivatives and other off-balance-sheet liabilities, there is no way for investors to have that assurance today.
While we will never be able to prevent all abuses, we can get the incentives right.
But we cannot rely on them when so many worldly people see nothing wrong with revolving doors.
They claim to manage conflicts of interest; but we see that they may manage them for their own interests.
But even as evidence for such abuses becomes apparent, new venues for abuse are repeatedly opened up - take the US repeal of the Glass Steagall Act, which separated commercial from investment banking.
Repeatedly, we have seen the consequences of the excesses of deregulation, of unfettered markets.
How victims remember trauma is the most controversial issue facing psychology and psychiatry today.
Many clinical trauma theorists believe that combat, rape, and other terrifying experiences are seemingly engraved on the mind, never to be forgotten.
Others disagree, arguing that the mind can protect itself by banishing memories of trauma from awareness, making it difficult for victims to remember their most horrific experiences until it is safe to do so many years later.
While acknowledging that trauma is often all too memorable, these certain clinical trauma theorists assert that a condition known as “traumatic dissociative amnesia” leaves a large minority of victims unable to recall their trauma, precisely because it was so overwhelmingly terrifying.
However, these clinical trauma theorists do not argue that “repressed” or “dissociated” memories of horrific events are either inert or benign.
On the contrary, these buried memories silently poison the lives of victims, giving rise to seemingly inexplicable psychiatric symptoms, and therefore must be exhumed for healing to occur.
The controversy has spilled out of the psychology laboratories and psychiatric clinics, capturing headlines, motivating legislative changes, and affecting outcomes in civil lawsuits and criminal trials.
Whether individuals can repress and recover memories of traumatic sexual abuse has been especially contentious.
During the 1990’s, many adult psychotherapy patients began to recall having been sexually abused during childhood.
While complaints against parents, based on allegedly repressed and recovered memories of abuse, have declined, those against large institutions, such as the Catholic Church, have increased.
Strikingly, both advocates and skeptics of the concept of traumatic dissociative amnesia adduce the same studies when defending their diametrically opposed views.
But it is the advocates who misinterpret the data when attempting to show that victims are often unable to recall their traumatic experiences.
After exposure to extreme stress, some victims report difficulties remembering things in everyday life.
Advocates of traumatic amnesia misconstrue these reports as showing that victims are unable to remember the horrific event itself.
In reality, this memory problem concerns ordinary absentmindedness that emerges in the wake of trauma; it does not refer to an inability to remember the trauma itself.
Ordinary forgetfulness that emerges after a trauma must not be confused with amnesia for the trauma.
Consider, too, that one symptom of posttraumatic stress disorder is an “inability to recall an important aspect of the trauma.”
This symptom, however, does not mean that victims are unaware of having been traumatized.
Indeed, the mind does not operate like a video recorder, and thus not every aspect of a traumatic experience gets encoded into memory in the first place.
High levels of emotional arousal often result in the victim’s attention being drawn to the central features of the event at the expense of other features.
Incomplete encoding of a trauma must not be confused with amnesia – an inability to recall something did get into memory.
Moreover, a rare syndrome called “psychogenic amnesia” is sometimes confused with traumatic amnesia.
Victims of psychogenic amnesia suddenly lose all memory of their previous lives, including their sense of personal identity.
Occasionally, this sudden, complete memory loss occurs after severe stress, but not invariably.
In contrast, the phenomenon of dissociative amnesia supposedly entails victims’ inability to remember their traumatic experiences, not an inability to remember their entire lives or who they are.
Several surveys show that adults reporting childhood sexual abuse often say that there was a period of time when they “could not remember” their abuse.
Claims of prior inability to remember imply that they had attempted unsuccessfully to recall their abuse, only to remember it much later.
Yet if these individuals were unable to remember their abuse, on what basis would they attempt to recall it in the first place?
Most likely, they meant that there was a period of time when they did not think about their abuse.
But not thinking about something is not the same thing as being unable to remember it.
Research conducted in my laboratory on adults reporting histories of childhood sexual abuse provides a solution to this bitter controversy.
Some of our participants reported having forgotten episodes of nonviolent sexual abuse perpetrated by a trusted adult.
They described it as having been upsetting, confusing, and disturbing, but not traumatic in the sense of being overwhelmingly terrifying.
Failing to understand what had happened to them, they simply did not think about it for many years.
When reminders prompted recollection many years later, they experienced intense distress, finally understanding their abuse from the perspective of an adult.
These cases count as recovered memories of sexual abuse, but not as instances of traumatic dissociative amnesia.
That is, the events were not experienced as traumatic when they occurred, and there is no evidence that they were inaccessible during the years when they never came to mind.
Of course, it is always morally reprehensible, even when it fails to produce lasting psychiatric symptoms.
NEW YORK – With interest rates near zero, the US Federal Reserve and other central banks are struggling to remain relevant.
The last arrow in their quiver is called quantitative easing (QE), and it is likely to be almost as ineffective in reviving the US economy as anything else the Fed has tried in recent years.
Worse, QE is likely to cost taxpayers a bundle, while impairing the Fed’s effectiveness for years to come.
John Maynard Keynes argued that monetary policy was ineffective during the Great Depression.
Central banks are better at restraining markets’ irrational exuberance in a bubble – restricting the availability of credit or raising interest rates to rein in the economy – than at promoting investment in a recession.
But the Fed, captured for more than two decades by market fundamentalists and Wall Street interests, not only failed to impose restraints, but acted as cheerleaders.
And, having played a central role in creating the current mess, it is now trying to regain face.
In 2001, lowering interest rates seemed to work, but not the way it was supposed to.
Rather than spurring investment in plant and equipment, low interest rates inflated a real-estate bubble.
This enabled a consumption binge, which meant that debt was created without a corresponding asset, and encouraged excessive investment in real estate, resulting in excess capacity that will take years to eliminate.
The best that can be said for monetary policy over the last few years is that it prevented the direst outcomes that could have followed Lehman Brothers’ collapse.
But no one would claim that lowering short-term interest rates spurred investment.
Indeed, business lending – particularly to small businesses – in both the US and Europe remains markedly below pre-crisis levels.
They still seem enamored of the standard monetary-policy models, in which all central banks have to do to get the economy going is reduce interest rates.
The standard models failed to predict the crisis, but bad ideas die a slow death.
So, while bringing down short-term T-bill rates to near zero has failed, the hope is that bringing down longer-term interest rates will spur the economy.
Large firms are awash with cash, and lowering interest rates slightly won’t make much difference to them.
And lowering the rates that government pays has not translated into correspondingly lower interest rates for the many small firms struggling for financing.
With so many banks in the US fragile, lending is likely to remain constrained.
Moreover, most small-business loans are collateral-based, but the value of the most common form of collateral, real estate, has plummeted.
The Obama administration’s efforts to deal with the real-estate market have been a dismal failure, perhaps succeeding only in postponing further declines.
But even optimists don’t believe that real-estate prices will increase substantially any time soon.
In short, QE – lowering long-term interest rates by buying long-term bonds and mortgages – won’t do much to stimulate business directly.
One way is as part of America’s strategy of competitive devaluation.
Officially, America still talks about the virtues of a strong dollar, but lowering interest rates weakens the exchange rate.
Whether one views this as currency manipulation or as an accidental by-product of lower interest rates is irrelevant.
The fact is that a weaker dollar resulting from lower interest rates gives the US a slight competitive advantage in trade.
Meanwhile, as investors look outside the US for higher yield, the flood of money out of the dollar has bid up exchange rates in emerging markets around the world.
Emerging markets know this, and are upset – Brazil has vehemently expressed its concerns – not only about the increased value of their currency, but that the influx of money risks fueling asset bubbles or triggering inflation.
The normal response of emerging-market central banks to bubbles or inflation would be to raise interest rates – thereby increasing their currencies’ value still more.
US policy is thus delivering a double whammy on competitive devaluation – weakening the dollar and forcing competitors to strengthen their currencies (though some are taking countermeasures, erecting barriers to short-term inflows and intervening more directly in foreign-exchange markets).
The second way that QE might have a slight effect is by lowering mortgage rates, which would help to sustain real-estate prices.
The Fed has bought more than $1 trillion of mortgages, the value of which will fall when the economy recovers – which is precisely why no one in the private sector wants to buy them.
The government may pretend that it has not experienced a capital loss, because, unlike banks, it is not required to use mark-to-market accounting.
But no one should be fooled, even if the Fed holds the bonds to maturity.
The attempt to ensure that the losses are not recognized might tempt the Fed to rely excessively on untested, uncertain, and costly monetary-policy tools – like paying high interest rates on reserves to induce banks not to lend.
It is good that the Fed is trying to make amends for its dismal pre-crisis performance.
Regrettably, it is far from clear that it has changed its thinking and models, which failed to maintain the economy on an even keel before – and are certain to fail again.
So will the new mistakes, even if the Fed strives to hide the price tag.
WASHINGTON D.C. -- After eight years on the job, Carla del Ponte is about to step down as the chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in The Hague.
Set up by the United Nations to prosecute those on all sides in the Balkan wars – Serbs, Bosnian Muslims, Croats, and, later, Albanian Kosovars – who committed atrocities, it is imperative that the UN appoint a new prosecutor prepared to carry on del Ponte’s work.
The ICTY was the first international criminal tribunal since the Nuremberg and Tokyo Tribunals at the end of World War II.
Despite a slow start, it has compiled an admirable record in bringing to justice and providing fundamentally fair trials for some 80 indictees, including generals, heads of state, and brutal prison camp commandants.
The flagship for successor war crimes courts in Rwanda, Sierra Leone, East Timor, Cambodia, and the permanent International Criminal Court, the ICTY is now in its final phase, slated to close its doors in 2010.
These final years will be critical, not only for the ICTY’s reputation and legacy but for international humanitarian law (the so-called “laws of war”).
The ICTY has overseen the development of a phenomenal body of jurisprudence that brings life to the abstract precepts of international law.
It has clarified the meaning and obligations of the Hague and Geneva Conventions on the treatment of prisoners and civilians in occupied territories.
Many of the highest-level trials are just beginning or will soon commence, and a substantial number of appeals are pending, which raise as yet undecided issues of the law of war.
While only four ICTY indictees remain at large, two fugitives – Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic – are among the most notorious suspects who must face justice before the ICTY’s work can be considered complete.
As a former judge at the ICTY, I can attest to the indispensable role that prosecutors inevitably play.
They ensure that key legal and factual issues get raised, that the best evidence is obtained – often through diplomatic means, but often at risk of life and limb in hostile territory – that guilty pleas do not dilute the truth, and that sentencing recommendations are commensurate with the crimes’ true dimensions.
The UN has given the ICTY three excellent prosecutors: Richard Goldstone from the South African Constitutional Court, Louise Arbour from the Canadian Supreme Court, and Del Ponte, a formidable prosecutor from Switzerland.
They have amassed a talented and dedicated corps of litigators whose meticulous preparation and thoughtful analyses have been critical to the court’s work.
Since leaving the ICTY, I have personally participated in annual joint training sessions for the appellate litigators of all the international criminal courts and know well that the caliber of the ICTY prosecutors’ work remains high.
Del Ponte, whose term expires at the end of the year, has just returned from Belgrade, where she sought again to try to facilitate the arrest of Karadzic and Mladic.
By all rights, her deputy, David Tolbert, an American lawyer with nine years of service at the Tribunal, should step effortlessly into her shoes.
Tolbert’s legal shrewdness, scholarly international law background, and smart management style are indisputable.
Tolbert has been especially successful in spearheading the Tribunal’s self-correction process to remedy earlier shortcomings in the efficiency, length, and cost of trials.
His appointment has been endorsed by del Ponte, other past prosecutors, and the top lieutenants and staff of the Prosecutor’s office, who sent a letter of support to the UN Secretary-General.
Even if Mladic or Karadzic are not turned over to the court, there are several top military and civilian leaders of the Srebrenica massacre whose cases are not yet finished, making the need for Tolbert paramount.
Alas, the UN’s ways are not always easy to comprehend, and it is reportedly contemplating the appointment of an outside prosecutor with no prior experience at the ICTY.
If that happens, the ICTY will lose its chief prosecutor and its deputy, and a large number of the staff will reportedly leave as well.
Those of us who have been playing a role in the birth and maturation of this grand experiment in international justice urge the UN to think hard before detouring from the proud tradition left by eminent Nuremberg prosecutors Robert Jackson and Telford Taylor, and by the first three ICTY prosecutors.
The UN should stay the course with Tolbert as the ICTY’s fourth and final prosecutor.
PARIS – As Germany’s Christian Democratic Union (CDU) and its Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), seek to form an unprecedented “Jamaica coalition” with the liberal Free Democrats (FDP) and the Greens, the rest of Europe anxiously awaits the government program that will result from their negotiations.
The rise of economic nationalism, growing security threats, and the ongoing refugee crisis have made collective responses more necessary.
China is becoming increasingly assertive, and US President Donald Trump’s administration has made clear its disdain for the European Union and its suspicions of Germany’s economic strength.
At home, the EU’s rationale is being tested by Brexit, and by the defiant governments of Poland and Hungary – two countries that, as Constanze Stelzenmüller of the Brookings Institution recently noted, are enjoying the benefits of EU membership and ignoring the corresponding obligations.
In this context, Emmanuel Macron’s election to the French presidency in May was a relief for Germany.
Yet Macron has put Germany in the uncomfortable position of having to respond to his proposals for EU-level reforms.
By calling for a common EU defense fund, tax harmonization, and a joint eurozone budget, Macron is upending the European status quo.
The question now is whether Europe’s largest and most prosperous country will provide the leadership these trying times demand.
On European matters, Chancellor Angela Merkel’s CDU, which has been in power for 12 consecutive years, will bring continuity.
But the more conservative CSU is being pulled to the right by competition from the populist Alternative für Deutschland (AfD).
As for the other two parties, the FDP has adopted a tough line toward Europe.
Its leaders have suggested that Greece should leave the euro, and that the EU mechanism for bailing out struggling countries should be dismantled.
The Greens, on the other hand, are keen on deepening European integration; but that is not their first priority, and they are the smallest party at the table.
Ultimately, the new government’s program will likely reflect the suspicion that other EU member states want to solve their problems with German money rather than domestic reforms.
German politicians and opinion makers assess virtually every proposal for EU-level reform through this distributional prism.
Schemes that are not intended to result in structural transfers are routinely dissected to confirm that they will not become cash dispensers for other EU members.
For example, Germans regard a joint budget not as a way to finance public goods such as research or infrastructure, but as a device to compel Germany to cover other countries’ expenses.
Similarly, common unemployment insurance is regarded as a scheme to make Germans pay for unemployed Spanish or French workers.
And a deposit-guarantee program for banks is seen as a way to force prudent German depositors to pay for non-performing loans in Italy.
All proposals certainly should be scrutinized to ensure that they will not be abused or introduce moral hazard.
But, at the same time, German leaders must recognize that their exclusive focus on distributional effects is poisonous.
They should recall the moment, in 1979, when British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher marched into a European summit and said, “I want my money back.”
The same logic was on display nearly 40 years later during the Brexit campaign, when “Leave” politicians falsely claimed that withdrawing from the EU would bring “money back” to the National Health Service.
The EU budget contains much to criticize, but it hardly treats Germany unfairly.
Germany may be the largest net contributor, but that is because it has the largest economy.
As a proportion of national income, countries like Belgium, France, and the Netherlands also contribute a meaningful share of their net income.
German fears that the European Stability Mechanism serves as a channel for hidden transfers are similarly unfounded.
Yes, the ESM benefits from low borrowing costs, which are essentially passed on to borrowing countries.
If Greece cannot repay its debt, ESM shareholders will suffer a loss; and that risk is not priced into the interest rate Greece pays.
But, so far, the ESM has continuously posted profits, and any loss it does suffer will be spread among all shareholders – including, for example, Italy.
The ESM is a far cry from a subsidy machine financed by the German taxpayer.
Some in Germany also decry the so-called Target2 balances, which record bilateral surpluses and deficits of national central banks vis-à-vis the European Central Bank.
The University of Munich’s Hans-Werner Sinn, for example, argues that the Target system has become a conduit for hidden operations to benefit debtor countries in southern Europe.
True, in September, the Bundesbank had a net surplus of €878 billion ($1.2 trillion) vis-à-vis the ECB, whereas Italy and Spain ran deficits of €432 billion and €373 billion, respectively.
These positions reflect the degree to which official flows are still substituting for private flows.
On the contrary, the Target system is essentially a collective insurance scheme: if a national central bank were to default, the loss would be shared among all ECB shareholders.
The system thus allows German exporters to continue to sell their products in southern Europe, because it guarantees that they will be paid.
It will always be in a political party’s interest to respond to the electorate’s fears.
But politicians also have a duty to let voters know when their fears are excessive or unfounded.
But it also needs a Germany that can overcome its narrow obsessions and provide leadership.
With the current coalition talks, German leaders have an opportunity to assess new global developments that will have far-reaching implications for Europe and Germany alike.
They must decide whether it is riskier to do nothing, or to take the initiative.
“First thing we do,” wrote Shakespeare in Henry VI, Part II, “is kill all the lawyers.”
Nowadays, the first thing countries trying to get rich seem to do is import dozens of lawyers.
In Eastern Europe, former communist countries applying for European Union membership must harmonize their laws with those of the EU.
So extensive is this process that it sometimes appears as a “legislative tornado.”
Importing laws and legal standards has dominated attempts by former communist countries to join the West.
Foreign experts helped draft model legal codes and revised draft laws throughout the Yeltsin era in Russia; outsiders helped craft Ukraine’s postcommunist constitution, the charters for the central bank of Estonia, Poland’s secured transaction regime, and Bulgaria’s securities regulations.
But importing well-designed laws from outside a country’s borders didn’t begin with communism’s fall.
The most extensive transplants of law took place when Europe’s empires spanned the globe.
After World War II, the US launched the first “law and development movement” to promote growth and slow communism’s spread.
Legal reform efforts in the former socialist bloc mark the second major law and development movement.
This time around, however, Europe competed with the US in spreading laws eastward.
What is new today is that, not only individual governments but international organizations, are embracing the idea of strengthening legal structures so as to improve the globe’s international financial architecture.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF), for example, pushes widespread improvement in laws related to corporate and financial institutions.
The IMF endorsed legal standards and codes of best practice developed by other institutions, but also promotes the development of new standards, including accounting and auditing standards, securities market regulations, bankruptcy law, codes for corporate governance, insurance and banking regulations.
The root idea is that such imported laws, once incorporated into domestic legal systems, improve a country’s legal framework and enhance development.
Even after Europe’s empires retreated, laws were still exported in order to foster development in post-colonial countries.
In many cases, however, these imported laws were ignored, selectively enforced, or were complied with only in form, not substance.
American antitrust law, when transplanted to Japan after World War II by General MacArthur, for example, led to only six criminal prosecutions in thirty years.
Land registration systems introduced in Africa conflicted with local customs, ignored soil conditions, and rarely led to the emergence of viable real estate markets.
Regular presidential elections in Mexico failed to disguise the fact that the same party ruled the country for over seven decades until earlier this year.
Imported legal solutions, it appears, are unlikely to work unless key constituencies - local farmers or business owners, say - support the process of legal transplantation and develop a demand for the legal solutions the transplanted rules offer.
Transplanting laws, indeed, seems as risky as transplanting organs because, like organs, legal transplants may be rejected.
- Only a few rules are freestanding, i.e. can be fully understood and enforced without reference to other legal terms and concepts.
Most legal terms and concepts are embodied in preexisting legal systems, whether informal or formal.
These preexisting conditions determine the interpretation of new rules as well as the receptivity of a country to imported rules and concepts;
- Application and enforcement of rules is determined by the perceptions of both users and law enforcers.
With the exception of highly technical rules, such as accounting standards, the contents and interpretation of rules is dependent on the context in which they are enforced.
So, even though a law may be standardized, law enforcement may see divergent outcomes;
A law ignored by most is difficult to enforce, unless the state employs excessive punishment in a few cases or substantial resources.
Voluntary compliance in turn depends on the perception and acceptance of rules by domestic constituencies in the country that imported a law.
Moreover, the process by which a law is developed has consequences for the effectiveness of legal institutions.
Countries that developed their formal legal order internally develop more effective legal institutions than those who rely - or were forced to rely - on legal transplants.
Countries that actively select legal norms from elsewhere, adapting them to local conditions, are on a par with countries that develop their legal order internally when it comes to the effectiveness of legal institutions.
Perhaps the effectiveness of legal institutions in developing countries and emerging markets is not the only goal.
If countries that adopt standards are defined as “safe” investments, foreign investors can justify their actions even if things go badly wrong.
But laws enacted for this reason could lose their signaling power when a financial crisis hits.
Investors need to take account of the effectiveness of domestic legal institutions, not just the laws on the books.
As the push to transplant legal norms grows, international agencies should focus on helping countries make their laws effective in practice, not just on paper.
They should improve access to information about how legal systems and laws actually function in their home jurisdictions.
This will provide recipient countries a clearer understanding of the context in which these institutions operate and the complexity of the tasks ahead.
It may also avoid transplanting solutions that simply won’t work absent complementary domestic legal rules and institutions.
Of course, this task is more difficult and time consuming than designing general standards, but the payoff may be worth it.
Monica rummages frantically in her bag as we dine at a Mexico City restaurant.
I'm always supposed to have my cell phone on--he likes to know where I am."
"You mean he likes to keep track of you," I say, and she laughs.
As Monica explains, sheepishly, that Esteban is actually open-minded, it dawns on me that I've been hearing a lot of similar stories recently, from female friends and patients.
The cell phone has become a new way for men to keep tabs on their wives, calling them and pressuring them to come home as soon as possible.
Machismo might be out of fashion in today's Mexico, but control is definitely in.
You rarely hear of men not allowing their wives to study, work, or go out during the day.
Almost 40% of working-age women hold jobs, school and university enrollment is evenly split between the sexes, and the average wage differential, whereby women earn about 70% of what men make, is comparable to that of industrialized nations.
Women are increasingly aware of their rights, demanding equal treatment in the workplace and in politics.
Nowadays, it relies more on psychological coercion and control than on discrimination or physical constraints.
Deeply buried within our daily customs, it is all but invisible among the educated classes--invisible, but ever present.
When they go out, spend money, see friends, they are still expected to render accounts.
Fathers, brothers, boyfriends, and husbands feel entitled to a detailed explanation of their everyday activities--but refuse to be questioned about their own.
At home, men can say, "Don't bother me now, I'm watching TV"; women can't, because they are expected to be available, day and night, for their husband and children.
Of course, it is far more evident in the privacy of the home than in the workplace or in public.
Surveys show that men are willing to go to the supermarket once a week or mind the children for a while; but they refuse to iron, sew, chop vegetables, or clean the oven or toilet, because these tasks are considered unmanly.
This division of labor in all areas of life means that men and women remain surprisingly inept at tasks assigned to the other sex.
We see educated men who don't know how to make a cup of coffee, and professional women with no idea about how to change a fuse.
Men know little about babies; women know little about checkbooks--because they aren't supposed to.
Far from creating a healthy complementarity between the sexes, it perpetuates dependence on both sides and creates widespread inefficiency.
Part of the problem is the deep-seated assumption that women are meant to attend to men's needs.
From the moment of their birth, men are surrounded by the constant care of women.
Mothers, aunts, grandmothers, sisters, and later girlfriends, wives, and daughters are expected to fulfill--even anticipate--a man's every desire.
Mothers tell little girls to "attend" their brothers, while little boys are instructed to "watch over" their sisters.
This non-stop pampering is aggravated by female domestic servants, ranging from the high society governess to the part-time maid of a middle-class family.
Though they allow women to go out and work, they ensure that men continue to be pampered like oriental potentates, never lifting a finger in the home.
Where wives and daughters now refuse to drop everything to prepare lunch for the man of the house, the maid takes up the slack.
Pampered Mexican boys grow into men accustomed to being obeyed instantly, who feel entitled to special attention, refuse to negotiate with those whom they consider inferior, and reject any form of criticism.
The men who dominate public life often fit this mold: they are demanding, impatient, intolerant, and self-centered.
There is an inescapable contradiction between machismo and our supposed transition to democracy.
As Monica sums it up with mock exasperation after our lunch, twice interrupted by her husband, "This machismo business doesn't make sense any more.
How can we continue to be governed by men who have never set foot in a supermarket?"
One reason is the set of ill-designed development strategies that the IMF and the World Bank have implemented in the region for nearly half a century.
But the centuries-old culture of leadership that is ingrained in many African societies has played an equally disastrous role.
Indeed, the overwhelming majority of African rulers regard their countries as their personal possessions, to be used as they see fit.
This conception of power led in past centuries to kings handing over their subjects to slave traders.
Nowadays, leaders squander their countries’ resources and revenues, leaving the majority of their populations mired in poverty, disease, hunger, war, and hopelessness.
Instead of being an asset, oil has become a liability that generates poverty, corruption, ethnic conflict, and ecological disaster.
Venezuela’s President Hugo Chávez, for example, is using his country’s oil revenues to provide free literacy training and health care, to help alleviate the debts of his Argentinean and Ecuadorian neighbors, to forge energy alliances in Latin America and the Caribbean, and to propose a strategic rapprochement with the Andean countries.
He has revived pan-Americanism, and Venezuela has become a member of Mercosur, the regional grouping whose other members include Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay, and Paraguay.
But, if a dysfunctional culture of leadership has put a similar agenda of unity and social progress out of reach for sub-Saharan Africa, so have the IMF and the World Bank.
When sub-Saharan African countries gained independence in the late 1950’s and early 1960’s, their leaders inherited bankrupt states with no access to international capital markets.
As a result, newly established African leaders had no alternative but to sub-contract economic development to the IMF and World Bank and the Western countries that control them.
Economic liberalization, deregulation of capital movements, suppression of subsidies, privatization of valuable public assets (liquidation would be a more appropriate word), fiscal austerity, high interest rates, and repressed demand became the order of the day.
Structural adjustment programs demanded by the IMF and the World Bank ended up transforming these countries into dumping grounds for over-subsidized Western agricultural surpluses and over-priced and obsolete manufactured goods.
It was obvious from the outset that the IMF/World Bank strategy was doomed to fail.
Their loans were designed to perpetuate Africa’s role as a supplier of raw materials, while entangling the continent in an inextricable web of debts and dependency on the “aid industry.”
The IMF can cut off not only its own credit, but also most loans from the larger World Bank, other multilateral lenders, rich country governments, and even much of the private sector.
But consider Argentina, which suffered a deep four-year depression, beginning in 1998.
Rejecting IMF demands for higher interest rates, utility price increases, budget tightening, and maintenance of the peso’s unsustainable link to the US dollar, Nestor Kirchner’s government was able to chart its own economic course.
Despite repeated threats from the IMF, Argentina took a hard line with foreign creditors, who were owed $100 billion.
In September 2003, Argentina did the unthinkable: a temporary default to the IMF itself.
Similarly, sub-Saharan Africa’s development cannot not be delegated to others.
Fortunately, there is hope that the region can resist the West’s destructive neo-liberal agenda.
According to the US Energy Department, America’s annual oil imports from Africa will soon reach 770 millions barrels, bringing an estimated $200 billion to the continent over the next decade.
If oil prices remain high – likely in the foreseeable future, given strong demand from the US, Japan, China, and India – oil revenues could reach $400-600 billion.
To reap the benefits, sub-Saharan Africa must form an oil-based confederation under the tutelage of thoroughly reformed regional groupings aimed at encouraging economic integration and political union.
This would provide the region with the muscle to pursue a development strategy similar to that adopted in the past by the US, the European Union’s member states, and the East Asian countries.
All of these countries imposed capital controls and regulated inward foreign investment in the early stages of their economic development.
The focus must be put on diversifying the economy and enhancing the productive capacity of domestic suppliers.
This will mean designing foreign partnerships with a view to ensuring that local businesses benefit from technology transfer and training, thereby generating higher value-added in domestic production and exports.
It also implies subsidizing and protecting domestic production, just as all developed nations once did – and still do whenever it suits them.
The first step towards implementing such policies, however, must be to re-invent and reinvigorate a pan-African identity.
Europe, Asia, and, increasingly, Latin America, are showing that regional integration provides the healthiest path to development.
In Africa, this will not be possible until a new breed of genuinely public-spirited leaders emerges.
Reducing sub-Saharan Africa’s dependence on the IMF and the World Bank might bring that day closer.
VENICE – The run-up in gold prices in recent years – from $800 per ounce in early 2009 to above $1,900 in the fall of 2011 – had all the features of a bubble.
And now, like all asset-price surges that are divorced from the fundamentals of supply and demand, the gold bubble is deflating.
At the peak, gold bugs – a combination of paranoid investors and others with a fear-based political agenda – were happily predicting gold prices going to $2,000, $3,000, and even to $5,000 in a matter of years.
In April, gold was selling for close to $1,300 per ounce – and the price is still hovering below $1400, an almost 30% drop from the 2011 high.
There are many reasons why the bubble has burst, and why gold prices are likely to move much lower, toward $1,000 by 2015.
First, gold prices tend to spike when there are serious economic, financial, and geopolitical risks in the global economy.
During the global financial crisis, even the safety of bank deposits and government bonds was in doubt for some investors.
If you worry about financial Armageddon, it is indeed metaphorically the time to stock your bunker with guns, ammunition, canned food, and gold bars.
Indeed, at the peak of the global financial crisis in 2008 and 2009, gold prices fell sharply a few times.
In an extreme credit crunch, leveraged purchases of gold cause forced sales, because any price correction triggers margin calls.
As a result, gold can be very volatile – upward and downward – at the peak of a crisis.
Second, gold performs best when there is a risk of high inflation, as its popularity as a store of value increases.
But, despite very aggressive monetary policy by many central banks – successive rounds of “quantitative easing” have doubled, or even tripled, the money supply in most advanced economies – global inflation is actually low and falling further.
The reason is simple: while base money is soaring, the velocity of money has collapsed, with banks hoarding the liquidity in the form of excess reserves.
Ongoing private and public debt deleveraging has kept global demand growth below that of supply.
Thus, firms have little pricing power, owing to excess capacity, while workers’ bargaining power is low, owing to high unemployment.
Moreover, trade unions continue to weaken, while globalization has led to cheap production of labor-intensive goods in China and other emerging markets, depressing the wages and job prospects of unskilled workers in advanced economies.
If anything, inflation is now falling further globally as commodity prices adjust downward in response to weak global growth.
Whereas equities have dividends, bonds have coupons, and homes provide rents, gold is solely a play on capital appreciation.
Now that the global economy is recovering, other assets – equities or even revived real estate – thus provide higher returns.
Indeed, US and global equities have vastly outperformed gold since the sharp rise in gold prices in early 2009.
Fourth, gold prices rose sharply when real (inflation-adjusted) interest rates became increasingly negative after successive rounds of quantitative easing.
The time to buy gold is when the real returns on cash and bonds are negative and falling.
But the more positive outlook about the US and the global economy implies that over time the Federal Reserve and other central banks will exit from quantitative easing and zero policy rates, which means that real rates will rise, rather than fall.
Fifth, some argued that highly indebted sovereigns would push investors into gold as government bonds became more risky.
Many of these highly indebted governments have large stocks of gold, which they may decide to dump to reduce their debts.
Indeed, a report that Cyprus might sell a small fraction – some €400 million ($520 million) – of its gold reserves triggered a 13% fall in gold prices in April.
Countries like Italy, which has massive gold reserves (above $130 billion), could be similarly tempted, driving down prices further.
Sixth, some extreme political conservatives, especially in the United States, hyped gold in ways that ended up being counterproductive.
For this far-right fringe, gold is the only hedge against the risk posed by the government’s conspiracy to expropriate private wealth.
These fanatics also believe that a return to the gold standard is inevitable as hyperinflation ensues from central banks’ “debasement” of paper money.
But, given the absence of any conspiracy, falling inflation, and the inability to use gold as a currency, such arguments cannot be sustained.
A currency serves three functions, providing a means of payment, a unit of account, and a store of value.
Gold may be a store of value for wealth, but it is not a means of payment; you cannot pay for your groceries with it.
Nor is it a unit of account; prices of goods and services, and of financial assets, are not denominated in gold terms.
So gold remains John Maynard Keynes’s “barbarous relic,” with no intrinsic value and used mainly as a hedge against mostly irrational fear and panic.
Yes, all investors should have a very modest share of gold in their portfolios as a hedge against extreme tail risks.
But other real assets can provide a similar hedge, and those tail risks – while not eliminated – are certainly lower today than at the peak of the global financial crisis.
While gold prices may temporarily move higher in the next few years, they will be very volatile and will trend lower over time as the global economy mends itself.
LONDON – British Prime Minister Theresa May is leading the United Kingdom toward a very “hard” Brexit in 2019 – and potentially off a cliff, if the UK leaves the European Union without an exit or trade deal.
In her January 17 speech, May outlined her objectives for negotiating with the EU, and made it clear that she will prioritize hardline Brexiteers’ demands over the country’s economic interests.
It isn’t surprising that May would choose a Brexit variant whereby Britain leaves both the EU’s single market and its customs union: she knows little, and cares even less, about economics.
Her ultimate objective is to survive as Prime Minister, and she believes that controlling immigration – a longtime personal obsession – will endear her to “Leave” voters, and that ending the European Court of Justice’s jurisdiction in Britain will pacify the nationalists in her Conservative Party.
Until now, Brexiteers had denied the existence of any political tradeoff between rejecting free movement and maintaining free trade with the EU.
As Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson fatuously claimed, Britons could have their cake and eat it.
Economically, this is a lose-lose proposition for the UK, which will now forego the benefits of free exchange with the rest of the EU, as well as the contributions of hard-working, tax-paying EU migrants.
UK-based services providers, notably financial firms, will lose the “passporting” privileges that allow them to operate freely within the EU.
She wants Britain to set its own tariffs and other trade commitments at the World Trade Organization, and then independently negotiate preferential arrangements – misleadingly called “free-trade agreements” – with some countries.
But this will entail customs controls on trade between Britain and the EU, including goods and services crossing the border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.
A new border bureaucracy will have to check customs compliance, calculate import duties depending on where goods are deemed to have originated, ensure payments, verify that goods comply with EU standards, and so forth.
This will be particularly costly and disruptive for manufacturers with complex, just-in-time supply chains: cars that are “made in Britain” actually include many components that cross borders repeatedly during the manufacturing process.
Rather than come clean about this, May is seeking “frictionless” trade through “associate membership” in the customs union, even though this directly contradicts her assertion that Britain does not want to be “half-in, half-out” of the EU.
Either way, such an arrangement is politically implausible, logistically impossible, and illegal under WTO rules.
May’s promise to pursue an exit deal and a trade deal simultaneously – and both within two years of the formal start of the withdrawal process (which she aims to initiate by the end of March) – is similarly unrealistic.
For starters, the EU insists on settling the divorce terms before discussing any future relationship.
This is no mere formality: While both sides could agree that EU citizens already in the UK, and Britons in the EU, can remain, an attempt by either side to use these people’s status as a bargaining chip could backfire.
What’s more, the EU is seeking up to €60 billion ($64 billion) from the UK to settle outstanding liabilities.
May’s threat to walk away from a bad deal may be credible, because she could blame the EU for the resulting chaos.
But the same cannot be said for her threat to hit back at the EU by slashing UK taxes and regulations.
There is little political support for such a move, and stripping away financial regulations would breach Britain’s international commitments.
Moreover, May has pledged to help the working class, strengthen labor rights, and ensure that global businesses pay their fair share of UK taxes.
Even if May can strike an exit deal, it is impossible to negotiate and ratify a sector-by-sector trade agreement in under two years.
The EU-Canada Comprehensive Economic and Trade Agreement, for example, took seven years to hash out – and was almost scotched by the parliament of Belgium’s Wallonia region.
There can be no “phased implementation” of a trade deal that has not been finalized, so UK-based car companies, financial institutions, and other businesses that export to the EU now should start preparing for the “cliff edge” that May wants to avoid.
Many of the 52% of Britons who voted for Leave want to stay in the single market, as do all of those who voted for Remain.
Furthermore, elected parliamentarians have been given no say in setting the government’s negotiating agenda.
While May has promised them a vote on the final deal, Britain will still leave the EU if they reject it.
And with US President Donald Trump threatening to start trade wars and abandon Europe to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s revanchist predations, this is an especially dangerous time for the UK to go it alone.
May claims that Brexit will enable Britain to strike better trade deals with non-EU countries, and she is pinning her hopes on a quick deal with Trump’s America.
But with Britain in such a desperate negotiating position, even an administration headed by Hillary Clinton would have driven a hard bargain on behalf of American industry.
US pharmaceutical companies, for example, want the UK’s cash-strapped National Health Service to pay more for drugs.
Like China and Germany, Britain exports much more to America than it imports from the US.
Trump hates such “unfair” trade deficits, and has pledged to eliminate them.
America's presidential election campaign is heating up, and with it the debate about American power.
A year ago, after the blitz victory in the four-week Iraq War, many people thought the issue was settled.
But the subsequent difficulties in Iraq - and in America's foreign relations more generally - have placed that topic at the heart of the election campaign.
It is hard to recall, but a little over a decade ago, conventional wisdom - both inside and outside the US - held that America was in decline.
In 1992, the winner of the New Hampshire primary election argued that "the Cold War is over - and Japan won."
When I published Bound to Lead in 1990, I predicted the continuing rise of American power.
But today I regard it as equally important to challenge the new conventional wisdom that America is invincible, and that the "new unilateralism" should guide US foreign policy.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union, some analysts described the resulting world as unipolar and saw few constraints on American power.
Power in a global information age is distributed among countries in a pattern that resembles a complex three-dimensional chess game.
The US is the only country with large state of the art air, naval, and ground forces capable of global deployment - thus, the quick victory in Iraq last year.
But on the middle chessboard, economic power is multi-polar, with the US, Europe, Japan, and China representing two-thirds of world production.
The bottom chessboard is the realm of transnational relations that cross borders beyond government control.
At the benign end of the spectrum, this realm includes actors as diverse as bankers electronically transferring huge sums; at the other end are terrorists transferring weapons or hackers disrupting Internet operations.
On this bottom board, power is widely dispersed, and it makes no sense to speak of unipolarity, multipolarity, or hegemony.
Those who recommend a unilateral American foreign policy based on such traditional descriptions of American power are relying on a woefully inadequate analysis.
Many of the real challenges to American power are coming not on the upper military board, on which the unilateralists concentrate, but on the lower transnational board.
Ironically, the temptation to go it alone may ultimately weaken the US in this domain.
Today's information revolution and the type of globalization that accompanies it are transforming and shrinking the world.
At the beginning of the 21st century, these two forces increased American power, particularly the ability to influence others through attractive, or what I call "soft" power.
But with time, technological gains will spread to other countries and peoples, diminishing America's relative pre-eminence.
For example, today America's 5% of the global population represents more than half of all Internet users.
But in a decade or two, Chinese may become the language of the largest number of Internet users.
It will not dethrone English as a lingua franca, but at some point, the Asian market will loom larger than the American market.
Even more important, the information revolution is creating virtual communities and networks that cut across national borders, and transnational corporations and non-governmental actors - terrorists included - will play larger roles.
Many organizations will have soft power of their own as they attract citizens into coalitions that cut across national boundaries.
The terrorist attacks on New York, Washington, and now Madrid are terrible symptoms of the deep changes already occurring.
Technology has been diffusing power away from governments, and empowering individuals and groups to play roles in world politics - including wreaking massive destruction - that were once reserved to governments.
Privatization has been the leitmotif in economic policy in recent years, but in politics the privatization of war is terrorism.
Moreover, as globalization shrinks distance, events in faraway places - like Afghanistan - have a greater impact on everyone's lives.
The world has moved from the Cold War to the Global Information Age, but the dominant foreign policy paradigms have not kept pace.
Today's growing global networks of interdependence are putting new items on national and international agendas;
International financial stability is vital to prosperity, but the US needs the cooperation of others to ensure it.
In a world where borders are becoming more porous than ever to everything from drugs to infectious diseases to terrorism, Americans will be forced to work with other countries beyond their borders.
Because of its leading edge in the information revolution, and its vast investment in traditional power resources, the US will remain the world's single most powerful country well into this new century.
While potential coalitions to check American power may be created, it is unlikely that they will become firm alliances unless the US handles its hard coercive power in an overbearing unilateral manner that undermines its "soft" or attractive power.
BRUSSELS – Although many European governments have announced expenditure cuts and tax hikes, their debt/GDP ratios continue to deteriorate.
So, if the purpose of austerity was to reduce debt levels, its critics are right: fiscal belt-tightening has failed.
Germany’s fiscal deficit temporarily increased by about 2.5 percentage points of GDP during the global recession of 2009; subsequent rapid deficit reduction had no significant negative impact on growth.
So it is possible to reduce deficits and keep the debt/GDP ratio in check – provided that the economy does not start out with large imbalances, and that the financial system is working properly.
Obviously, the countries on the eurozone’s periphery do not meet these conditions.
Countries whose governments have either lost access to normal market financing (like Greece, Ireland, and Portugal), or face very high risk premia (like Italy and Spain in 2011-2012) simply do not have a choice: they must reduce their expenditures or get financing from some official body like the International Monetary Fund or the European Stability Mechanism (ESM).
But foreign official financing will always be subject to lenders’ conditions – and lenders see no reason to finance ongoing spending at levels that previously led a country into trouble.
So, in the eurozone periphery, austerity is not a question of fine-tuning demand, but of ensuring governments’ solvency.
Economists like to point out that solvency has little to do with the ratio of public debt to today’s GDP, and much to do with debt relative to expected future tax revenues.
A government’s solvency thus depends much more on long-term growth prospects than on the current debt/GDP ratio.
A reduction in the deficit today might lead in the short run to a fall in GDP that is larger than the cut in the deficit (if the so-called multiplier is larger than one), which would cause the debt/GDP ratio to rise.
But almost all economic models imply that a cut in expenditures today should lead to higher GDP in the long run, because it allows for lower taxes (and thus reduces economic distortions).
Austerity should thus always be beneficial for solvency in the long run, even if the debt/GDP ratio deteriorates in the short run.
For this reason, the current increase in debt/GDP ratios in southern Europe should not be interpreted as proof that austerity does not work.
Moreover, austerity has been accompanied by structural reforms, which should increase countries’ long-term growth potential, while pension reforms are set to reduce considerably the fiscal cost of aging populations.
Such& reforms promise to strengthen the solvency of all governments that adopt them, including those on the eurozone’s periphery.
More important, austerity has been very successful in restoring external balance to the eurozone’s periphery.
The current accounts of all southern eurozone countries are improving rapidly and, with the possible exception of Greece, will soon swing into surplus.
This fundamental change has contributed to the reduction in risk premia over the last year, despite the political upheaval that continues in many countries (particularly Italy, Portugal, and Greece).
If public debt is owed to domestic investors, it can be serviced with the taxes levied on GDP.
But debt owed to foreigners can be serviced only with goods and services sold abroad – that is, exports.
Thus, the key variable for countries that had large current-account deficits, and thus are burdened today with high foreign-debt levels, is not the debt/GDP ratio, but the foreign debt/exports ratio (together with the growth prospects for exports).
During the boom years, when countries like Greece, Portugal, and Spain were running ever-larger external deficits, their exports did not grow quickly, so their foreign debt/exports ratios deteriorated steadily, reaching levels that are usually regarded as a warning signal.
For example, for Spain and Portugal, the sum of past deficits relative to annual exports reached 300% and 400%, respectively, in 2009, whereas a 250% ratio is typically regarded as the threshold at which external-financing problems can arise.
With austerity, imports have crashed everywhere in the periphery, while exports – helped by falling labor costs – are increasing (except in Greece).
As a result, these countries’ current accounts are now moving into surplus, and their external solvency is improving rapidly.
Indeed, according to the IMF, Spain should record growing current-account surpluses over the next five years, as exports rise strongly, thus cutting the external debt/export ratio by half (to about 150% in 2018), while Portugal’s ratio should fall to about 250%.
Even Italy, whose external deficits have remained small, will soon record a current-account surplus.
Austerity always involves huge social costs; but it is unavoidable when a country has lived beyond its means and lost its foreign creditors’ confidence.
The external fundamentals of the eurozone’s periphery are now improving rapidly.
In this sense, austerity has done exactly what it was intended to do.
LONDON – Around the world, America’s presidential election campaign has attracted as much attention as domestic political controversies in each of our own countries.
The interest the world has taken in America’s vote is the best example of America’s soft power, and a lesson in democracy from the world’s only superpower.
If only we could all vote as well as watch and listen, because the outcome is vital for everyone around the world.
What does the world want – and, perhaps more importantly, what does it need – from a new American President?
Much as some may hate to admit it, anti-Americanism is a sentiment that has been fed and nurtured during the Bush years.
Yes, we are witnessing the emergence of China, Brazil, and India as important global economic players.
Yes, we have watched the humiliating fall of Wall Street’s masters of the universe.
Yes, American military prowess has drained away into what Winston Churchill called “the thankless deserts of Mesopotamia,” and its moral authority has been weakened by events in places from Guantánamo Bay to Abu Ghraib.
Yet the United States remains the world’s only superpower, the only nation that matters in every part of the globe, the only country capable of mobilizing international action to tackle global problems.
A new president’s first task will be to return America’s economic competitiveness and self-confidence.
It will not be easy to rein in over-spending and over-borrowing, to restore the real family values of saving, thrift, responsibility, and fair reward.
Achieving these goals is bound to involve a greater regard for social equality, after a period in which the very rich have been able to protect a “Roaring Twenties” lifestyle through cleverly exploiting the “culture wars” – i.e., the populist prejudices of their much poorer fellow citizens.
With America turning away from its global role of borrower of last resort, the rest of us will need to sharpen our competitive edge to sell in other markets.
What is imperative is that this should not be impeded by a return to protectionism.
A new American president would do well to remember the disastrous consequences of protectionism in the 1920’s and 1930’s.
We all look to the next US president to re-engage with the world community and international organizations, accepting that even a superpower should accept the rules that apply to others.
But a necessary if not sufficient condition for change is America’s commitment to and leadership of the process.
Forget the distraction of trying to create an alternative to the UN – the so-called “League of Democracies.”
We want a new president who will aim to make a success of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty Renewal Conference in 2010 by scrapping more weapons, abandoning research into them, and challenging others to do the same.
That would be the best backdrop to establishing tougher surveillance and monitoring, beginning to engage with Iran, and searching for a way to involve India and Pakistan in a global nuclear agreement.
Ahead of that, a new president should unleash America’s creative potential in boosting energy efficiency and developing clean technologies.
It would be a welcome surprise if a comprehensive follow-up to the Kyoto Treaty could be agreed next year.
But at least we should aim to agree on the process that will move world-wide discussions in the right direction and, as part of that, America should aim to engage Europe, China, and India, in particular, on technological developments like clean coal.
America’s relationship with China will be a key to prosperity and security in this new century.
I do not think that a struggle for hegemony is inevitable, or that it would be desirable.
The US should focus more attention on China, without ever pretending that China’s record on human rights can be swept under the carpet.
In the Middle East, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert offered wise advice to the next US president upon his retirement.
Israel and Palestine have become, he said, the hopeless and bloody prism through which American diplomacy often seems to see the world.
It has long since been time to move on, making a sustained drive for the sort of settlement that was almost achieved in the Clinton years.
When we get one, will the rest of us – Europe, for example – actually respond with sufficient commitment and drive?
It would at least be a welcome challenge to be required to put our efforts where our mouths have been.
SAN FRANCISCO -- The French government should be honoring Bank of France Governor Christian Noyer for saving Société Générale from certain bankruptcy in the current rogue trader scandal, not criticizing him, as some high government officials have done.
But if President Nicolas Sarkozy’s team in the Élysée Palace had had its way, Noyer would have immediately informed the government of Société Générale’s troubles.
Had that happened, there would have been an unacceptable risk that the news would leak to speculators before Société Générale had a chance to liquidate the extraordinary large stock positions that Jérôme Kerviel had amassed, presumably without the bank’s knowledge.
The loss for Société Générale could have been far higher than the €5 billion it is reported to have incurred.
Speculators could have “front run” the bank in the markets, selling short, driving equity prices down, and forcing the French financial institution to sell into a bottomless pit.
Is a forced bankruptcy in extremely fragile global financial markets what the French government wanted for Société Générale?
How can President Sarkozy, who has repeatedly attacked financial speculators, question the judgment of the very man who, by knowing how to keep his mouth shut in a crisis, thwarted them?
Of course, independent central bankers are not Sarkozy’s favorite people.
According to Laurent Dubois, a political science professor at the Sorbonne in Paris, Noyer may pay for Sarkozy’s battles with the European Central Bank.
Sarkozy has “a problem with central banks’ independence,” and Noyer may become a “scapegoat.”
According to the TNS Sofres poll for Le Figaro Magazine, Sarkozy’s popularity tumbled a whopping eight percentage points in January, to just 41%, the lowest level since he took office last May and down from a high of 65% in July.
Sarkozy, who during his electoral campaign vowed to be the “president who delivers on purchasing power,” now faces an angry French public whose primary complaint is that purchasing power is being eroded by inflation.
In this changed political environment, Sarkozy is not likely to go after someone like Noyer who, as Bank of France Governor and a member of the ECB’s Governing Council, is widely viewed as a stalwart against inflation and a defender of French purchasing power.
Sarkozy might even tone down his attacks on the ECB, whose single-minded, inflation-fighting policies have made it one of his favorite targets.
With Sarkozy off his back, ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet might feel freer to cut interest rates to counter the impending economic slowdown in Europe.
Meanwhile, though Société Générale has been saved by Noyer’s professionalism and political courage, it has been badly wounded and will most likely be taken over by another bank.
“Société Générale will remain a great French bank,” Prime Minister Francois Fillon has said.
“The government will not allow it to be the target of hostile raids by other banks.”
The problem is that the French government is barred from doing this under an EU directive that it signed last year, which was specifically introduced to improve transparency in banking mergers.
After Italy’s former central bank governor, Antonio Fazio, flagrantly abused his position to block a takeover of an Italian bank by ABN Amro, member countries agreed that future mergers would be assessed on five objective criteria, the idea being to prevent governments from blocking foreign bids purely for protectionist reasons.
Noyer’s diplomatic skill certainly will be put to the test if he has to navigate the treacherous waters between the Scylla of French protectionism and the Charybdis of the EU’s five criteria for bank mergers.
So far, the only serious candidates to emerge for a Société Générale takeover are two French banks, Credit Agricole and BNP Paribas.
But should a credible foreign offer for Société Générale appear in the coming weeks ­– and it well might – another disruptive conflict between the Bank of France and the government may be in the offing.
The Société Générale rogue trader scandal has caused more problems than any of the main players possibly could have imagined.
NEW YORK: Even by Boris Yeltsin’s wayward standards, the last few weeks have been frantic.
The Russian economy has cracked, as has the ruble, foreign bank loans are not being repaid, and Yeltsin’s new/old choice for prime minister - Viktor Chernomyrdin - is having trouble getting his nomination approved by the Duma.
Russians are unaccustomed to parading themselves before the world as vulnerable and in need of a begging bowl.
So, to hear a procession of investment bankers proclaim that, realistically speaking, Russia’s economy is of no more importance to the world than Santo Domingo, was more than humiliating: deep down many Russians suspected that this might very well be true.
The guilty secret was that Russians made themselves appear strong because they were afraid that the world (i.e., the West) would discover their weaknesses.
Here the all-powerful Tsar was key to protecting the great Russian soul from the "evil" western influences of freedom and disorder.
Those freedoms had to be kept out if the country’s rampant vulnerabilities were to remain a family secret.
The time came, however, when Russia could no longer hide its flaws behind its vast steppes and iron curtain.
It became obvious that Russia, for all its bravado, was in fact an economic, political, and social basket case, and the country was in such a state precisely because it lacked those bracing Western freedoms.
Though Russia's facade of strength disintegrated over the past decade, the rhetoric of strength did linger on.
So, too, did devotion to the idea of a Tsar, to someone who can say: I will lead you to the brightest future; follow me.
The irony nowadays, however, is that that "bright future" is not to be found by keeping the West at bay (the role the Tsar almost always played) but by moving the country toward the West and its values.
Yeltsin, despite his myriad flaws, has been a perfect tsar for a transitional time, good for both Russians and for foreigners.
He bridged the old authoritarian tradition of one man making all political (and almost every other) decision of consequence, with a new openness in word and deed that helped convince the world that Yeltsin and the Russian people had become dedicated followers of democratic fashion.
Russia’s current crisis put Yeltsin's "double-sidedness" on bold display.
The firing and rehiring of Viktor Chernomyrdin within the span of five months appears to justify all the old canards that Yeltsin rules only by impulse, without any system of belief, ideas, or philosophy to guide him.
He goes on the stump in election campaigns and restricted himself to only two presidential terms.
He consults with Duma sessions, and attempted to design a younger more vigorous reform government; and so on and so on.
At other times Yeltsin acts as impetuously as any ordained Tsar: he passionately ordered his tanks to fire at his own Duma in1993, the clearest signal of all that he never intended to really share his unlimited autocratic power.
The war in Chechnya showed Yeltsin a man who would not even think about recognizing the first rule of democracy: self-determination, the right of any nation to choose its own independent path of development.
Moreover, over the years, Yeltsin was as mercurial as the worst of Russia’s monarchs in shifting his "boyars" in and out the "royal" circle.
Though the "democratic" Yeltsin pleased the West, particularly President Clinton it seems, the "autocratic"erratic Yeltsin was far more familiar to Russians.
The tsar is once more cruel and unpredictable; but he is ours, we know him.
Yeltsin’s inability over the past six years to choose a clear policy path and stick to it corresponds to these two sides of his nature: one authoritarian, the other a reformer.
But this leaves his adversaries and his friends in a quandary: is he just a typical dictatorial Russian leader of the sort America fought the Cold War against, or is he the man who, in order to be accepted as a member of the West and its best clubs - the G-7, EU, and their like - tolerates such unpleasant things for Russia as NATO's expansion right up to its border.
The now on-the-out reformers - Kirienko, Nemtsov, Chubais and their supporters - were supposed to serve the Westernization of Yeltsin and of Russia.
They clearly had ambitious and worthy and necessary aspirations for the country and its relationship with the world.
Besides, their lean ambitiousness never really fit within the style of a traditional Russian leader - stout, slow-speaking and slow-moving.
If that looks and sounds familiar it is because Viktor Chernomyrdin is a paradigm of those traits.
That "heavyweight's" putative return as Yeltsin's number two (and it really is hard to imagine that, in the end the Duma will reject Chernomyrdin, he being so much like them) is like the shelling of the Duma, or the war in Chechnya: not particularly good for the country, but oh so well-known to Russians.
Chernomyrdin offers nothing surprising to Russians, and they don't mind that -- they are tired of surprises.
And the West too, even though disappointed at his return, probably realizes what it will get from him if today’s financial bloodletting can be stopped: reform, of a fashion and at a snail's pace.
There is another important issue here which most observers have overlooked: as a "transitional" Tsar Yeltsin can no longer rule alone.
For now he will retain the title of President, while real power will pass to Victor Chernomyrdin.
He may not be the best man to arrest today’s financial panic, but he is likely to be the best figure that the Duma will approve.
Only if - and it is a big if - the economy is stabilized is there hope that a real reform process can begin anew.
NEW YORK – Those who have been telling us that Islam, not just revolutionary Islamism, is a lethal threat to Western civilization should now feel satisfied: the President of the United States, and his main advisers, agree with them.
In the tweeted words of Donald Trump’s National Security Adviser, General Mike Flynn: “Fear of Muslims is rational.”
Stephen Bannon, the former executive chairman of the alt-right Breitbart News who is Trump’s chief political strategist and a member of the National Security Council, has stated that the “Judeo-Christian” West is engaged in a global war with Islam.
Trump has promised to put “America first,” borrowing the slogan of American isolationists in the 1930s, whose most famous spokesman, the aviator Charles Lindbergh, was a notorious anti-Semite who blamed Jews and liberals for pulling the US into a war with Hitler, a man whom he admired.
Lindbergh believed that, “We can have peace and security only so long…as we guard ourselves against attack by foreign armies and dilution by foreign races.”
Are the views concerning Islam that are now entrenched in the White House in any way similar to the anti-Semitism of the 1930s?
Have Bannon, Flynn, and Trump simply updated old prejudices, and replaced one set of Semites with another?
Trump’s failure to mention Jews or anti-Semitism in his statement on Holocaust Remembrance Day seemed distinctly odd.
And his campaign’s warning against prominent Jews, such as George Soros, who were claimed to be part of a global conspiracy to undermine America, did not go unnoticed.
There was no revolutionary movement among Jews then, committing atrocities in the name of their faith.
Nor were there any states with Jewish majorities that were hostile to the West.
One chilling give-away is the use of biological language in the perception of the enemy.
The title of one widely distributed Nazi pamphlet was “The Jew as World Parasite.”
Frank Gaffney, an influential figure in Trump’s ethnic nationalist circles, spoke of Muslims as “termites,” who “hollow out the structure of the civil society and other institutions.”
Once human beings are categorized as parasites, germs, or noxious termites, the conclusion that they must be destroyed to defend social health is not far off.
There may be another difference, however, between the persecution of Jews and contemporary hostility to Muslims.
Prewar anti-Semitism was directed not just at religious Jews, but also – and perhaps especially – at assimilated Jews, who were no longer easy to identify in any way as distinct.
Prejudice against Muslims would appear to be less racial, and more cultural and religious.
Nineteenth- and twentieth- century anti-Semites assumed that a Jew was always a Jew, no matter what he or she professed to believe.
Judaism was seen not as a spiritual faith, but as a political culture, which was by definition incompatible with Western civilization and its institutions.
In fact, they were the reasons why the learned authors of independent Norway’s first constitution, drafted in 1814, prohibited Jews from becoming citizens.
The case for exclusion was based on a defense of Enlightenment principles: Jewish culture and beliefs would inevitably undermine Norway’s liberal democracy.
Today’s enemies of Islam often use precisely this argument: Muslims lie to infidels.
What we must fear, in Gaffney’s words, is “this stealthy, subversive kind of jihad.”
But even if the underlying fears and prejudices about Muslim and Jewish conspiracies are similar, the consequences are likely to be quite different.
Jews, alleged by the Nazis to pose an existential threat to Germany, could be persecuted – and later murdered en masse – with total impunity.
Apart from a few small desperate rebellions, there was no way for Jews to resist Nazi power.
The brutal violence of revolutionary Islamism, on the other hand, cannot be dismissed.
Acts of Islamist terror in Western countries can be prevented only through good intelligence and police work, particularly in Muslim communities.
But if all Muslims are antagonized and humiliated, terrorism will become a great deal worse.
And what a “global war on Islam” will do to the highly combustible politics in the Middle East and Africa can easily be guessed.
In that case, the “clash of civilizations” that exists in the minds of Islamist terrorists, as well as some of their most ardent enemies, would no longer be a fantasy; it could actually come to pass.
Whether Trump’s crusaders are lighting fires without quite knowing what they are doing, or whether they might actually wish for a conflagration, is not yet clear.
But it is perhaps not too cynical to imagine that Trump’s ideologues do wish to see blood.
Islamist violence will be met by emergency laws, state-sanctioned torture, and limits on civil rights – in a word, authoritarianism.
But it certainly is not the outcome that most Americans, including some of those who voted for him, would wish for.
NEW YORK -- There is an ongoing debate among global policymakers about when and how fast to exit from the strong monetary and fiscal stimulus that prevented the Great Recession of 2008-2009 from turning into a new Great Depression.
Germany and the European Central Bank are pushing aggressively for early fiscal austerity; the United States is worried about the risks of excessively early fiscal consolidation.
In fact, policymakers are damned if they do and damned if they don’t.
If they take away the monetary and fiscal stimulus too soon – when private demand remains shaky – there is a risk of falling back into recession and deflation.
While fiscal austerity may be necessary in countries with large deficits and debt, raising taxes and cutting government spending may make the recession and deflation worse.
On the other hand, if policymakers maintain the stimulus for too long, runaway fiscal deficits may lead to a sovereign debt crisis (markets are already punishing fiscally undisciplined countries with larger sovereign spreads).
Or, if these deficits are monetized, high inflation may force up long-term interest rates and again choke off economic recovery.
The problem is compounded by the fact that, for the last decade, the US and other deficit countries – including the United Kingdom, Spain, Greece, Portugal, Ireland, Iceland, Dubai, and Australia – have been consumers of first and last resort, spending more than their income and running current-account deficits.
Meanwhile, emerging Asian economies – particularly China – together with Japan, Germany, and a few other countries have been the producers of first and last resort, spending less than their income and running current-account surpluses.
Overspending countries are now retrenching, owing to the need to reduce their private and public spending, to import less, and to reduce their external deficits and deleverage.
But if the deficit countries spend less while the surplus countries don’t compensate by savings less and spending more – especially on private and public consumption – then excess productive capacity will meet a lack of aggregate demand, leading to another slump in global economic growth.
First, in countries where early fiscal austerity is necessary to prevent a fiscal crisis, monetary policy should be much easier – via lower policy rates and more quantitative easing – to compensate for the recessionary and deflationary effects of fiscal tightening.
In general, near-zero policy rates should be maintained in most advanced economies to support the economic recovery.
Second, countries where bond-market vigilantes have not yet awakened – the US, the UK, and Japan – should maintain their fiscal stimulus while designing credible fiscal consolidation plans to be implemented later over the medium term.
Third, over-saving countries like China and emerging Asia, Germany, and Japan should implement policies that reduce their savings and current-account surpluses.
Specifically, China and emerging Asia should implement reforms that reduce the need for precautionary savings and let their currencies appreciate;
Germany should maintain its fiscal stimulus and extend it into 2011, rather than starting its ill-conceived fiscal austerity now; and Japan should pursue measures to reduce its current-account surplus and stimulate real incomes and consumption.
Fourth, countries with current-account surpluses should let their undervalued currencies appreciate, while the ECB should follow an easier monetary policy that accommodates a gradual further weakening of the euro to restore competiveness and growth in the eurozone.
Fifth, in countries where private-sector deleveraging is very rapid via a fall in private consumption and private investment, the fiscal stimulus should be maintained and extended, as long as financial markets do not perceive those deficits as unsustainable.
Sixth, while regulatory reform that increases the liquidity and capital ratios for financial institutions is necessary, those higher ratios should be phased in gradually to prevent a further worsening of the credit crunch.
Seventh, in countries where private and public debt levels are unsustainable – household debt in countries where the housing boom has gone bust and debts of governments, like Greece’s, that suffer from insolvency rather than just illiquidity – liabilities should be restructured and reduced to prevent a severe debt deflation and contraction of spending.
Finally, the International Monetary Fund, the European Union, and other multilateral institutions should provide generous lender-of-last-resort support in order to prevent a severe deflationary recession in countries that need private and public deleveraging.
In general, deleveraging by households, governments, and financial institutions should be gradual – and supported by currency weakening – if we are to avoid a double-dip recession and a worsening of deflation.
Countries that can still afford fiscal stimulus and need to reduce their savings and increase spending should contribute to the global current-account adjustment – via currency adjustments and expenditure increases – in order to prevent a global shortage of aggregate demand.
Failure to implement such coordinated policy measures – to sustain global aggregate demand at a time when deflationary trends are still severe in advanced economies – could lead to a very dangerous and damaging double-dip recession in advanced economies.
Such an outcome would cause another bout of severe systemic risk in global financial markets, trigger a series of contagious sovereign defaults, and severely damage the growth prospects of emerging-market economies that have so far experienced a more robust recovery than advanced countries.
SINGAPORE – Behind a veil of secrecy, China’s development of strategic and tactical missiles is well into its third generation of modernization.
While the development of Chinese long-range missile and nuclear forces has traditionally been characterized as conservative, incremental, and slow, it has taken place against a backdrop of steadily growing official emphasis on the country’s defense-industrial complex, particularly its aerospace sector.
This process has been accelerated by a confluence of defense-industry reforms, comprehensive military upgrading, and integration of innovative operational concepts.
The net effect is a growing capability of China’s strategic missile forces and military space platforms.
Various reports suggest that China is selectively enhancing its strategic and tactical missile capabilities by developing solid-fuel motors; diversifying its range of warheads and increasing their accuracy; deploying missiles with multiple warheads; and upgrading its ballistic-missile defense countermeasures, such as decoys, chaff, jamming, and thermal shielding, and possibly maneuverable reentry vehicles (MaRVs) and multiple independently targetable reentry vehicles (MIRVs).
In particular, China is developing, testing, and deploying a new generation of solid-propellant, road-mobile intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs).
These include the DF-31 and DF-31A, which are equipped with nuclear payloads.
It is also designing and developing new classes of conventional short-range ballistic missiles (SRBMs) and medium-range ballistic missiles (MRBMs), such as the DF-21 – mobile, solid-propellant, longer range, more accurate, and able to exploit vulnerabilities in ballistic missile-defense systems.
As part of its missile and nuclear-force modernization, China is also focusing on developing its sea-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) such as the JL-2, testing the DF21-D as an anti-ship ballistic missile (ASBM) for maritime strikes, and further developing its anti-satellite weapon capabilities (ASAT).
The purpose behind China’s continuous modernization of its strategic assets is to enhance the credibility of its deterrent threat by improving the survivability of its nuclear forces.
Thus, China is diversifying its missiles in terms of their strike capabilities and mobility, and formulating innovative anti-access/area-denial asymmetric warfare concepts to close the gap with technologically more advanced adversaries and near competitors – principally the United States, Russia, and Japan.
China’s progress in modernizing its strategic assets and capabilities owes much to the ongoing transformation of China’s defense industries, particularly the aerospace sector, over the past decade.
Since the late 1990’s, China’s government has gradually introduced elements of competition and globalization, with the aim of overcoming the entrenched monopoly of China’s traditional defense-industrial conglomerates.
The reforms have been guided by two broad concepts: the “Four Mechanisms” – competition, evaluation, supervision, and encouragement – and yujun yumin, or identifying military potential in civilian capabilities, with defense industries integrating into the broader civilian economy.
The reforms have essentially enabled China to streamline research and development efforts, as well as technology transfers between selected components of its civil and commercial space programs.
As a result, China has also been able to bypass existing export controls and restrictions on the transfer of sensitive military technologies, particularly aerospace and satellite components and know-how.
Indeed, China’s military use of space is increasingly dependent and interlinked with civilian and commercial space activities, infrastructure, and human capital.
Its space launch vehicles (SLVs) can be used for satellites with a range of applications – including communications, weather, observation, and navigation – which may significantly enhance the effectiveness of China’s military space operations and systems.
While ballistic missiles have generally different rocket engines, basing profiles, and launch methods, their guidance and control systems may use similar components, and SLVs may use stage components based on ballistic missiles.
The trajectory of China’s ballistic missile R&D and production shows a gradual transition from copying and reproducing first-generation Soviet ballistic-missile technologies to adapting and modifying smaller, mobile, solid-propellant ballistic missiles and their follow-on second-generation systems.
China is now an independent producer and technological innovator of selected missile systems and related aerospace technologies.
Ultimately, China views its military, civil, and commercial space programs as being at the forefront of its national defense, economic development, and geostrategic influence.
The rest of the world should regard China’s aerospace capabilities as an important part of its future power projection.
CAMBRIDGE – The Aspen Strategy Group, a non-partisan group of foreign-policy experts that former US National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft and I co-chair, recently wrestled with the question of how to respond to Russia’s actions in Ukraine.
While the West must resist Russian President Vladimir Putin’s challenge to the post-1945 norm of not claiming territory by force, it must not completely isolate Russia, a country with which the West has overlapping interests concerning nuclear security, non-proliferation, anti-terrorism, the Arctic, and regional issues like Iran and Afghanistan.
Moreover, simple geography gives Putin the advantage in any escalation of the conflict in Ukraine.
It is natural to feel angry at Putin’s deceptions, but anger is not a strategy.
The West needs to impose financial and energy sanctions to deter Russia in Ukraine; but it also must not lose sight of the need to work with Russia on other issues.
Reconciling these objectives is not easy, and neither side would gain from a new Cold War.
Thus, it is not surprising that when it came to specific policy recommendations, the Aspen group was divided between “squeezers” and “dealers.”
This dilemma should be put in long-term perspective: What type of Russia do we hope to see a decade from now?
Despite Putin’s aggressive use of force and blustery propaganda, Russia is a country in decline.
Putin’s illiberal strategy of looking East while waging unconventional war on the West will turn Russia into China’s gas station while cutting off its economy from the Western capital, technology, and contacts that it needs.
Some of Russia’s opponents might welcome the country’s decline on the grounds that the problem will eventually solve itself.
A century ago, the decline of the Austro-Hungarian and Ottoman Empires proved highly disruptive to the international system.
A gradual decline, like that of ancient Rome or eighteenth-century Spain, is less disruptive than a rapid one, but ultimately the best scenario would feature a recovering and rebalanced Russia over the next decade.
The rise in oil prices at the beginning of the century gave the economy an artificial boost, leading Goldman Sachs to include it among the world’s major emerging markets (one of the “BRICs,” along with Brazil, India, and China).
Russia’s GDP is about one-seventh the size of America’s, and its per capita income (in purchasing-power-parity terms) of $18,000 is roughly one-third that of the US.
Oil and gas account for two-thirds of Russian exports, half of state revenues, and 20% of GDP, whereas high-tech exports represent only 7% of its manufactured exports (compared to 28% for the US).
Resources are allocated inefficiently across the economy, with a corrupt institutional and legal structure that impedes private investment.
Despite the attractiveness of traditional Russian culture and Putin’s calls to boost Russian soft power, his bullying behavior has sown mistrust.
Few foreigners watch Russian films, and no Russian university was ranked in the global top 100 last year.
The likelihood of ethnic fragmentation is lower than in Soviet days, but it still remains a problem in the Caucasus.
Non-Russians comprised half of the Soviet population; they now make up 20% of the Russian Federation and occupy 30% of its territory.
The birth rate is declining, mortality rates have increased, and the average Russian male dies in his early sixties.
Mid-range estimates by United Nations demographers suggest that Russia’s population may decline from 145 million today to 121 million by mid-century.
But, though Russia at this point appears to be an industrial banana republic, many futures are still possible.
It has talented human resources, and some sectors, like the defense industry, can produce sophisticated products.
Some analysts believe that with reform and modernization, Russia would be able to surmount its problems.
Former President Dmitri Medvedev, who worried that Russia would fall into the so-called middle-income trap rather than graduate to advanced-country status, laid out plans to do just that.
Under Putin, Russia’s post-imperial transformation has failed, and Russia remains pre-occupied with its place in the world and torn between its historical European and Slavophile identities.
Putin lacks a strategy for Russia’s long-term recovery and reacts opportunistically – albeit sometimes successfully in the short run – to domestic insecurity, perceived external threats, and the weakness of his neighbors.
Russia has thus become a revisionist spoiler of the international status quo – one that seeks to be a catalyst for other revisionist powers.
But an ideology of anti-liberalism and Russian nationalism is a poor source of the soft power that the country needs to increase its regional and global influence.
Thus, the prospects that a Russian-led Eurasian Union can compete with the European Union are limited.
Whatever the outcome of Putin’s revisionism, Russia’s nuclear weapons, oil and gas, skills in cyber technology, and proximity to Europe, will give him the resources to cause problems for the West and the international system.
Designing and implementing a strategy that contains Putin’s behavior while maintaining long-term engagement with Russia is one of the most important challenges facing the international community today.
PRINCETON – The British government’s recent announcement that a referendum on Britain’s European Union membership will be held on June 23 was quickly followed by a sharp drop in the pound’s value.
Exchange rate volatility for the pound is bound to continue until the referendum, and to intensify at moments when a vote for “Brexit” looks more likely.
The result may be a self-fulfilling prophecy, in which market and political instability drive British voters to reject the EU – an outcome that would be highly dangerous for them and their European counterparts alike.
The political implications recall the experience of the twentieth century, when the pound’s external value was a national obsession in the UK and currency crises regularly destroyed the credibility of governments and wreaked political havoc.
For example, in August 1931 – the middle of the Great Depression – a financial crisis and a run on the pound forced the resignation of the Labour government, led by Prime Minister Ramsay MacDonald; it was replaced by a coalition government, and the Labour Party split apart.
In 1967, another Labour government, led by Harold Wilson, was damaged by a devaluation spurred by a speculative attack;
The party regained power in 1974, but within two years Britain was hit by another currency crisis – this one large enough to require support from the International Monetary Fund.
It was under Prime Minister John Major’s Conservative government that 1992’s “Black Wednesday” struck, with the pound being forced out of the European Exchange Rate Mechanism, the precursor to the euro.
Although the Conservatives did manage a narrow victory in the next election, the party’s internal fissure over European integration deepened, and by the end of the 1990s, Labour was back in power (and would remain there for more than a decade).
The economic effects of Britain’s twentieth-century currency crises were far less severe than the political repercussions.
In fact, the devaluation of 1931 set the stage for an era of cheap money, which made 1930s Britain a much less dismal place than it had been under the economic orthodoxy of the gold standard in the 1920s.
And the 1992 devaluation led to a new monetary-policy approach, greater macroeconomic stability, and faster economic growth.
Exchange-rate fluctuations pose a serious short-term challenge for monetary policy, given the potential of the resulting price changes to spur inflation.
That may not seem like such a bad thing, given today’s excessively low inflation (partly a result of falling oil and commodity prices); the risk, of course, is that inflation will overshoot.
More dangerous is the possibility that political uncertainty in the run-up to the referendum will discourage foreigners from buying British assets – a major problem for a country with a large current-account deficit.
The prospect of losses from a declining exchange rate will be a further deterrent, potentially pushing the United Kingdom into a vicious cycle of collapsing confidence.
In that case, the forced adjustment of the current account would tip the economy into recession.
As in the twentieth century, this economic breakdown is likely to destroy the credibility of Prime Minister David Cameron’s Conservative government.
The question is whether that will turn voters against the government’s pro-EU campaign, causing them to choose Brexit, or against the damaging referendum that the government has introduced, thereby spurring a pro-EU outcome.
Those, including Cameron, who support continued EU membership emphasize that Europe (but not the single currency) is a source of strength and stability for the UK.
Meanwhile, advocates of Brexit argue that the UK is uniquely powerful, with the most dynamic capital city in the world and, as Justice Secretary Michael Gove put it, the world’s greatest concentration of “soft power.”
If the prospect of a referendum alone is enough to push the UK into dire economic straits, both the government that introduced that referendum and the group campaigning to exacerbate the situation are effectively discredited.
The risk is that UK voters, angry about the government’s damaging actions, will succumb to the pro-Brexit camp’s false claim that leaving the EU will restore the UK’s economic dynamism.
In any case, the Conservative Party is sure to face the kind of internal conflict that destroyed the Labour party after 1931 and again after 1976.
For the rest of Europe, the British political drama is a source of frustration and embitterment.
At a time when the EU is confronting many serious challenges, the last thing it needed was protracted and awkward negotiations on the changes to the terms of UK membership that Cameron’s government demanded.
None of this bodes well for Europe’s commitment to keeping the UK in the Union.
Just as some European politicians during the Greek debt crisis advocated amputating the “infected limb,” a growing number may lose patience as the UK’s economic situation deteriorates.
Indeed, despite the destabilizing impact of Brexit, it is possible that, in the long run, Europe would be better off without the UK.
After all, Britain’s government both recognizes the need for greater fiscal integration and continues to resist it.
In this sense, Brexit may offer Europe the chance for a new start – one that EU leaders may consider taking.
But the more likely outcome of Brexit would be the spread of financial crisis, with all of its political repercussions.
OXFORD – Throughout the history of the oil industry, fear and concern about the imminent exhaustion of oil reserves has been a recurring theme.
Such sentiments often spread and capture the public imagination at times of rapidly rising oil demand, sharp spikes in energy prices, and geo-political uncertainty.
So today’s talk of oil scarcity, which began at the turn of the last century, should come as no surprise.
Believers in oil scarcity point to the sustained annual average increase of oil prices from 2002 to 2008, declining output in many areas of the world, and the absence (until recently off the coast of Brazil) of large-scale oil discoveries in the last few decades.
In the face of relentless demand-side pressure, driven mainly by high-growth countries like China and India, some predict stratospheric energy prices, supply shortages, economic and social hardship, and even resource wars.
Given that oil is a non-renewable resource, in a sense the world is always running out of it.
Unless global demand collapses, at some point in the future oil production will peak and eventually be exhausted.
For it to be useful, believers in scarce oil must be able to predict such things as the timing of the oil peak, the state of demand when oil production reaches it, and the pattern of decline.
But the track record of “peak oil” theorists on such matters has not been impressive: their predictions have steadily moved forward the date that global oil production will peak.
Worse still, they have made no serious attempt to identify why their earlier predictions have had to be revised.
Resources are the available volumes of hydrocarbon without reference to constraints as to their accessibility and/or cost.
Resources impose an upper bound on what ultimately can be produced; thus, it is the relevant concept for determining the likely dates of peak production and ultimate exhaustion.
If the volume of oil resources were known with certainty, and if we could accurately predict the growth of oil consumption, calculating the imminence of exhaustion would be simple.
But these are big “ifs” – especially given the high level of uncertainty regarding the ultimate volume of oil resources.
While peak oil theorists have strong views about that, they do not allow for all the current and future technological possibilities that might increase resources.
Indeed, given the difficulty in estimating the total size of resources, many consider peak oil theories irrelevant.
Reserves are defined as the quantities of petroleum that are expected to be commercially recoverable from known fields.
It is also a non-static concept, as estimates of reserves will generally be revised upwards or downwards as additional geologic or engineering data become available, as technology improves, and/or as economic conditions (such as oil prices and production costs) change.
In fact, the bulk of recent growth in world reserves is due not to new discoveries, but mainly to reserve growth and improved recovery rates.
Moreover, despite what many believe, crude oil is far from being a homogenous product.
There is a fossil carbon continuum ranging from easy, conventional oil, to deep and ultra-deep offshore oil, to extra-heavy crude oil.
With technological progress and rising oil prices, most of these reserves will become conventional, helping to push back peak oil for years.
The failure to distinguish clearly between resources and reserves – and to recognize the importance of prices, costs, and technology in transforming resources into reserves – results in bad predictions about an imminent peak in oil production and misinformation that has had a negative impact on policymaking.
Rather than focusing on the major short- and long-term challenges facing the oil industry, the debate about peak oil diverts attention to the wrong problems.
In the short term, there are concerns that oil production will peak soon, owing not to the unavailability of reserves, but to obstacles to investment – for example, access to reserves, sanctions, and policy uncertainty.
Some who believe in the imminence of peak oil consider these barriers essentially irrelevant, arguing that their removal would merely delay the peak for a few years.
But, in the long term, the challenge is how to make the transition to a new and sustainable energy path, and to evaluate the political, economic, social and climate costs associated with this transition.
The current tone surrounding the peak oil debate is reminiscent of that surrounding the global war on terror, with the phrase “you’re either with us or against us” recycled to polarize observers and analysts.
But as in any other debate, once extreme positions dominate, the real problems are trivialized and marginalized.
NEW YORK – I have just returned from Bhutan, the Himalayan kingdom of unmatched natural beauty, cultural richness, and inspiring self-reflection.
From the kingdom’s uniqueness now arises a set of economic and social questions that are of pressing interest for the entire world.
Bhutan’s rugged geography fostered the rise of a hardy population of farmers and herdsmen, and helped to foster a strong Buddhist culture, closely connected in history with Tibet.
The population is sparse – roughly 700,000 people on territory the size of France – with agricultural communities nestled in deep valleys and a few herdsmen in the high mountains.
Each valley is guarded by a dzong (fortress), which includes monasteries and temples, all dating back centuries and exhibiting a masterful combination of sophisticated architecture and fine arts.
Bhutan’s economy of agriculture and monastic life remained self-sufficient, poor, and isolated until recent decades, when a series of remarkable monarchs began to guide the country toward technological modernization (roads, power, modern health care, and education), international trade (notably with neighboring India), and political democracy.
What is incredible is the thoughtfulness with which Bhutan is approaching this process of change, and how Buddhist thinking guides that thoughtfulness.
Bhutan is asking itself the question that everyone must ask: how can economic modernization be combined with cultural robustness and social well-being?
In Bhutan, the economic challenge is not growth in gross national product, but in gross national happiness (GNH).
I went to Bhutan to understand better how GNH is being applied.
There is no formula, but, befitting the seriousness of the challenge and Bhutan’s deep tradition of Buddhist reflection, there is an active and important process of national deliberation.
Part of Bhutan’s GNH revolves, of course, around meeting basic needs – improved health care, reduced maternal and child mortality, greater educational attainment, and better infrastructure, especially electricity, water, and sanitation.
This focus on material improvement aimed at meeting basic needs makes sense for a country at Bhutan’s relatively low income level.
Bhutan is also asking how economic growth can be combined with environmental sustainability – a question that it has answered in part through a massive effort to protect the country’s vast forest cover and its unique biodiversity.
It is asking how it can preserve its traditional equality and foster its unique cultural heritage.
And it is asking how individuals can maintain their psychological stability in an era of rapid change, marked by urbanization and an onslaught of global communication in a society that had no televisions until a decade ago.
I came to Bhutan after hearing an inspiring speech by Prime Minister Jigme Thinley at the 2010 Delhi Summit on Sustainable Development.
The first concerned the environmental devastation that he could observe – including the retreat of glaciers and the loss of land cover – as he flew from Bhutan to India.
Thinley put it simply: We are each finite and fragile physical beings.
How much “stuff” – fast foods, TV commercials, large cars, new gadgets, and latest fashions – can we stuff into ourselves without deranging our own psychological well-being?
For the world’s poorest countries, such questions are not the most pressing.
But, for more and more countries, Thinley’s reflection on the ultimate sources of well-being is not only timely, but urgent.
Everybody knows how American-style hyper-consumerism can destabilize social relations and lead to aggressiveness, loneliness, greed, and over-work to the point of exhaustion.
What is perhaps less recognized is how those trends have accelerated in the United States itself in recent decades.
This may be the result of, among other things, the increasing and now relentless onslaught of advertising and public relations.
The question of how to guide an economy to produce sustainable happiness – combining material well-being with human health, environmental conservation, and psychological and cultural resiliency – is one that needs addressing everywhere.
It will be able to increase exports of clean, run-of-the-river hydropower to India, thereby earning foreign exchange in a manner that is sustainable and that can fill government coffers to fund education, health care, and infrastructure.
The country is also intent on ensuring that the benefits of growth reach all of the population, regardless of region or income level.
Incautious and expensive advice from McKinsey and other private consulting firms could help turn Bhutan into a degraded tourist zone.
One must hope that the quest for GNH will help steer the country away from such temptations.
The key for Bhutan is to regard GNH as an enduring quest, rather than as a simple checklist.
Bhutan’s Buddhist tradition understands happiness not as attachment to goods and services, but as the result of the serious work of inner reflection and compassion toward others.
So far, al-Qaeda has successfully inflamed the dreaded "clash of civilizations."
When its terrorists struck America in 2001, they seemed to confirm the Western world's worst fears about Islam.
As punishment, because Turkey sided with the US-led invasion of Iraq?
But Turkey neither let foreign troops be stationed on its territory, nor did it send its troops into the war.
Perhaps al-Qaeda's motive in targeting Turkey is to derail a Muslim nation from its progress toward joining the European Union?
Not surprisingly, after the attacks Western leaders reaffirmed the urgency of bringing Turkey into the European fold.
Much comment on Turkish society pays lip service to Turkey's unique place as a "bridge" between Islam and secularism, and between East and West.
The problem with being the bridge, though, is that neither side--neither the "West" nor the "Muslim world"--considers Turkey fully one of its own.
Too Muslim for the West; too secular for the Muslims: over time, this dichotomy has been a source of weakness for Turkey, bringing successive national identity crises.
In today's multicultural world, however, Turkey stands out as a genuinely multifaceted and complex unity of multiple identities.
The day after the second set of bombings in Istanbul, I took a taxi to the bombed British Consulate.
The obvious topic of conversation as the horrors of the bombing, but the driver, while polite, was unresponsive.
Perhaps it was just a matter of personality, or he may have been reflecting the shock and confusion that covered most of Istanbul after the blasts.
There were two stickers by the rearview mirror, standing side-by-side and sending seemingly contradictory messages.
One read, "Hakimiyet Allah'indir," which roughly translates as "Allah rules" or "power belongs to Allah," a slogan that could be identified with Islamist sentiments.
Right next to it, though, was the Turkish flag in duplicate--a central symbol of secular Turkish nationalism.
Complicating the picture more was a third item: soft Western music on the car's radio.
Survey after survey show that most Turks believe in God and identify themselves as Muslims.
But their adherence to Islam is illustrated by the example of a man I once saw at Muslim prayer in the ruins of the ancient Zeus temple in a small town on the Aegean coast.
Clearly, this devout believer was overtaken by the sanctity of this pagan temple and was praying to his own God in the only way he knew.
He saw no contradiction between his beliefs and the setting in which he expressed them.
This is what al-Qaeda, as well as purists in the West, can't understand about Turks: they do not feel they have to choose between being modern and being Muslim.
In the days following the attacks in Istanbul, Turks across the board condemned this brutal violence: there was no (or only negligible) blame-the-victim sentiment toward Turkish Jews (or toward Israel) or toward the British and Americans, whose war in Iraq is extremely unpopular in Turkey.
At the same time, Turks did not turn against Islam, as though this killing could be justified by religion.
Instead, they expressed sorrow for the victims (whether Jewish, Muslim, or British) and a firm commitment to Turkey's chosen path.
The terrorism of Turkey's Kurdish separatists had, in the past, caused great strife, due to numerous mistakes made in assessing and addressing the source of the problem.
But the terrorist attacks in Istanbul are unlikely to generate a nervous reaction in restricting democratic rights.
If al-Qaeda was behind the attacks, it grossly miscalculated.
Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan's reaction summed up the Turkish sentiment: "These bombs aim to destroy the peace and stability in our country.
If these bombings are meant to send a message, I will sweep it off and crush it under my feet."
Indeed, even much of the Islamist political movement in Turkey has already made its choice in favor of democracy and universal human rights.
When the Muslim world was thrown into confusion and disarray after the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the democratic wing of the Islamist movement was working on a platform of legislative reforms it would propose for EU accession.
Turkey's "conservative democrats" in the Justice and Development (AK) Party came to power in the first election thereafter, in November 2002, and were quickly able to marginalize radical elements among both the Islamists and secularists.
In fact, the current AK Party government is the best placed to win the war against al-Qaeda in Turkey.
While a secularist coalition, mixing apples and oranges, may have declared war against a broad front of Islamic tendencies, the government, with its moral authority among the Muslim majority in Turkey, will be able to isolate the violent fringe and drive it into oblivion.
This would, perhaps, be the ultimate triumph of the Turkey's unique cultural model.
BRUSSELS – This year, International Women’s Day is focused on “inspiring change” and challenging the status quo to achieve gender equity worldwide.
The sad reality is that, despite significant social, political, and economic progress, women still face major personal and professional obstacles in developed and developing countries alike.
This state of affairs does not hurt only women; it undermines everyone’s prospects.
Consider the information and communications technology sector, which is critical to the future competitiveness of major economies – particularly Europe’s.
With application-software development alone capable of employing 4.8 million people and contributing €63 billion ($87 billion) to the European Union’s economy by 2018, enabling women to contribute to the ICT sector’s development is a matter of common sense.
Having identified technological progress as one of the most important sources of growth and employment, the Commission has specified 101 policy measures – including programs aimed at increasing women’s participation in the ICT workforce – to deliver sustainable GDP growth through digital technologies.
Despite stubbornly high unemployment levels across Europe – more than 10% of the working-age population and over 20% of young people remain unemployed, according to Eurostat – up to a half-million vacancies are expected in the technology sector by next year.
This gap can be explained largely by students’ belief that a career in technology is not a viable option – a view that is particularly prevalent among women.
Indeed, outdated cultural norms and stereotypes – such as the idea that science, technology, engineering, and mathematics are “for boys” – continue to prevent women from pursuing ICT-based careers.
As a result, only 2.9% of bachelors or first degrees held by European women are ICT-based, compared to 9.5% for men.
To be sure, there are women who are working hard to challenge the stereotypes.
For example, earlier this week, at Microsoft’s annual AppCup competition, which gives European developers and young entrepreneurs the opportunity to showcase their skills, two promising female developers ranked among the 13 finalists – a major accomplishment, given that this year’s contest attracted 200 submissions from 31 countries.
Andreea Pleșea, a business software developer from Romania, submitted Mobile Gamification – an app that motivates employees by providing incentives for participation, engagement, and loyalty among team members to achieve specific business goals.
And France’s Dominique Sauquet presented Dynseo, which allows health-care professionals to administer the full battery of cognitive tests needed to assess cognitive impairment and memory loss in the elderly.
Women account for only 9% of developers in Europe’s booming app industry, and comprise only 30% of workers in the broader ICT sector.
Underrepresentation of women in the sector is damaging its competitiveness and impeding Europe’s return to growth.
According to the European Commission, if as many women participated in the ICT workforce as men, Europe’s annual GDP could increase by €9 billion.
Moreover, given that organizations with more women in management achieve a 35% higher return on equity and 34% better total return to shareholders than their counterparts, greater gender parity would be a boon for the sector.
More important, women’s exclusion from the ICT sector is a disservice to thousands of talented young people like Pleșea and Sauquet.
It is also simply bad business: Consider the millions of potential customers whose ways of living, working, and playing might be transformed by these women’s ideas.
Addressing the technology sector’s gender gap must begin at the university level, with a diverse range of students – especially women – being encouraged to pursue tech studies.
At the same time, initiatives like Web-based training, game-based eLearning, and social networking – as proposed by the European Commission – could help motivate women to enter or return to the ICT workforce.
PARIS – If voters in the United Kingdom decide in the country’s referendum on June 23 to leave the European Union, it will not be for economic reasons.
They may choose Brexit because they want full sovereignty, because they hate Brussels, or because they want migrants to return home, but not because they expect great economic benefits.
The pro-Brexit camp initially appeared to be holding two strong economic cards.
The first was UK citizens’ overwhelming rejection of their country’s net fiscal transfer to the rest of the EU, which currently amounts to 0.4% of GDP.
Since Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher first demanded to have “her money back” in 1979, the budgetary costs of EU membership have completely overshadowed its economic benefits in the public’s view.
In terms of GDP growth, employment, or innovation, other EU countries, on average, lag behind the UK (and, to an even greater extent, the United States).
Whereas EU membership was once regarded as a gateway to prosperity, it is increasingly viewed as a drag on progress.
But lately, as John Van Reenen of the London School of Economics recently put it, the economic case for Brexit has been largely missing in action.
Its advocates are at pains to explain what kind of trade and partnership agreements, if any, Britain could enter into with the EU, much less how those agreements would be superior to the current arrangement.
As a result, it is tough to argue that the UK would receive a net economic boost – or even that it will not suffer considerably – by leaving the EU.
Of the eight economic evaluations recently surveyed by the Institute for Fiscal Studies, a respected independent research institution, only one claims that leaving the EU would lead to significant economic gains.
And that study – produced, unsurprisingly, by Economists for Brexit – has been sharply criticized by the rest of the economic profession for lacking an appropriate analytical basis.
UK exporters would end up participating less in the large EU market, and they would be shut out of EU-negotiated agreements ensuring access to major international markets.
While the UK could negotiate new agreements with these partners, that would take time, and, acting alone, its negotiating power would presumably be weaker.
This means that the UK would trade less with EU and non-EU partners alike.
It would pay higher prices for inputs and consumer goods, and British firms’ reduced integration into global value chains would undermine productivity.
The cost in terms of foregone GDP would be 5-20 times higher than the saving implied by not contributing to the EU budget.
All modern analysis of economic internationalization shows that foreign trade is a powerful selection mechanism.
It provides major growth opportunities for the most productive and innovative firms, while enabling them to learn from their overseas competitors.
It is no accident that the world’s best firms – which have the highest productivity, profits, and wages, and invest in strengthening human capital – are trade champions.
Brexit’s adverse impact on UK firms’ scope for development would further increase the economic cost.
Prime Minister David Cameron’s Conservatives are deeply divided on the topic, while Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour Party is lukewarm about the EU.
Because the choice is not between left and right, independent views have gained greater weigtht.
The June 23 referendum is important in its own right, owing to its far-reaching implications for the UK’s relationship with Europe.
If British voters decide to leave the EU, it will indicate that rational economic arguments carry less weight than emotional appeals.
Such an outcome will bolster populist forces elsewhere – from Italy to France to the US – in their advocacy of isolationist policies that most experts regard as economic nonsense.
To oppose such forces and policies, mainstream political parties will have to address their failure, even with the facts on their side, to offer a narrative compelling enough to convince voters to choose economic openness.
A vote by a majority of British citizens to remain in the EU would have the opposite impact, highlighting that, whatever negative feelings people may have about a policy or entity, reason and logic cannot be tossed aside.
Equally important, such an outcome could encourage greater scrutiny of the economic consequences of populist programs in the US and the rest of Europe.
What is at stake in the June 23 referendum is therefore not only the relationship between Britain and the EU – or even the future of the “European project.”
How voters decide will be an important test of whether democratic choices in advanced countries are governed by economic rationality or popular passions.
SANTIAGO – Europe has long been menaced by the threat of two crises.
The first would erupt with a successful speculative attack on a large eurozone country’s bonds, immediately jeopardizing the single currency’s survival.
European Central Bank President Mario Draghi’s vow to do “whatever it takes” to prevent a sovereign default in the eurozone seems to have diminished that danger – at least for now.
The other looming danger is a growth crisis – a threat that has become increasingly serious.
The ECB’s most recent macroeconomic forecast, which cut expected GDP growth for both 2012 and 2013, makes the threat all too clear: The eurozone will certainly contract this year, and grow by just 0.3%, at best, next year.
Europe persistently undershoots its growth targets because European policymakers persistently underestimate fiscal multipliers, pursuing austerity instead.
And slower growth means lower revenues, which imply larger deficits and heavier debt burdens – at which point, as Wolfgang Munchau of the Financial Times and others have stressed, the entire belt-tightening exercise begins to look self-defeating.
It is also increasingly plausible that the debt overhang is itself becoming the cause of slow growth.
Few people want to go down that route, because it leads directly to the question of debt forgiveness.
But the issue can no longer be ignored – and not just in the case of Greece.
The concept of a debt overhang has been around forever, but it became prominent during the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980’s.
Like many aspects of that crisis, it is applicable to Europe’s situation today.
A debt overhang exists when a country’s debt is large enough that the benefits of adjustment and growth go entirely to the creditors.
As the Nobel laureate economist Paul Krugman pointed out a quarter-century ago, a country in this situation will be unwilling to undertake additional painful adjustment, because it gets nothing in return.
And, because the proceeds of any new investment will be taxed away to service existing obligations, the debt overhang discourages private investment and growth.
If the disincentive is large enough, then a larger debt burden may cause the country’s repayment capacity to fall.
For low levels of debt, increasing the debt burden increases the flow of payments that creditors get; but this relationship is reversed once the debt volume crosses a certain threshold.
Reducing the face value of the debt is good not just for debtor countries on the “wrong side” of the curve; it is also good for creditors, who stand to get more of their money back.
But, while this neat theoretical construct clarifies the problem, figuring out where a country lies on its debt-relief Laffer curve is no easy matter.
Many doctoral dissertations were written on this issue during the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980’s.
First, Latin American countries did not start growing again until debt had been substantially reduced through a series of initiatives – the most important being the Brady Plan of 1989, under which Latin American countries enacted reforms in exchange for debt relief.
Second, creditors who stayed in – by swapping old obligations either for new Brady bonds or for local equity – typically did very well.
Skeptics will reply that Europe is not Latin America, and that the interest rates levied on European governments today are much lower than what Argentina or Mexico had to pay back then.
France’s public debt is 90% of GDP and rising, and five European countries’ debt/GDP ratios are above 100%.
And the recent spike in the interest-rate spread on Italian government bonds should remind optimists that, with sovereign debt so high, many things can go wrong at any time.
More and more Europeans are coming around to the view that Greece needs to have its debt cut yet again, and that this time official claims on Greece should be cut as well.
But few Europeans today believe that Italy, Spain or Portugal, much less France, will need debt reduction.
ZURICH – Scotland’s vote on independence from the United Kingdom has spurred widespread debate about the secession of small states, such as Slovenia and Croatia in 1991, or the independence drive today in Spain’s autonomous region of Catalonia.
But the narrow focus on the political and economic implications for Scotland and the UK – or, for that matter, the referendum’s decisive pro-union outcome – should not overshadow one of the more overlooked geopolitical trends of our time: the rise of small countries.
Roughly 75% of today’s small countries were formed in the last 70 years, mostly as a result of broader democratic transitions and in tandem with trade growth and globalization.
Their successes and failures are more germane to current discussions than, say, the fiscal implications of Scottish independence.
The lessons to be learned from these cases are useful not only to new and potentially new small countries.
Relatively young small countries in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Middle East can also benefit by examining the secrets of Singapore’s success, the causes and effects of Ireland’s property bubble, and Denmark’s decision to build strong counter-terrorism capabilities, despite its relative safety.
Indeed, such considerations can help them to chart a path to economic prosperity and social cohesion.
Of course, in learning from one another, countries must always be careful to avoid the “folly of imitation.”
The Nordic countries, for example, have benefited significantly from deeply entrenched social, legal, and political characteristics that are not easy to transfer to their developing-country counterparts.
Moreover, young small countries must recognize that building the institutions and economies to which they aspire will take time.
In fact, age may well be the most important factor in small-country performance, with per capita GDP in small countries that were established before 1945 some four times larger than in their newer counterparts.
For example, they occupy nearly half of the top 20 positions in the United Nations Human Development Index.
In general, older small countries outstrip medium-size and large countries in terms of economic and social performance, openness to international trade, and enthusiasm for globalization – features that younger countries should work to promote.
But small countries’ economic growth is often more volatile – a tendency that younger states must learn to contain if they are to prosper in the long term.
The question of “large” or “small” government is less relevant, despite the impression given by heated debates in large countries like the United States.
A better proxy would be public-sector salaries – the only area where large countries appear to benefit from economies of scale.
Smaller countries spend more, as a percentage of GDP, on education and health care – another habit that new small countries would do well to uphold.
Indeed, there is a strong positive correlation between the pace of economic growth and “intangible infrastructure” – the combination of education, health care, technology, and the rule of law that promotes the development of human capital and enables businesses to grow efficiently.
Small countries account for seven of the top ten countries for intangible infrastructure.
Add to that measures like the quality of institutions, suitability to thrive in a globalized world, stability of economic output, and level of human development, and one can generate a country strength index, in which 13 of the top 20 performers are small, with the most successful being Switzerland, Singapore, Denmark, Ireland, and Norway.
A cluster of larger countries is led by Australia, the Netherlands, and the UK.
Other “resilient” small countries include Finland, Austria, Sweden, and New Zealand.
Developing small states like Croatia, Oman, Kuwait, and Uruguay may consider exhortations to emulate countries like Switzerland and Norway to be impractical.
Specifically, small developing countries should focus on building institutions, such as central banks and finance ministries, that explicitly seek to minimize the macroeconomic volatility associated with globalization.
They should also advance the rule of law, develop strong and efficient public education and health-care systems, and encourage domestic industry to emphasize return, rather than cost of capital, as their guiding metric.
Surprisingly, very few such alliances exist, with many small countries – especially developing ones – cultivating close ties with “big brother” countries or immersing themselves in regional federal structures.
The risk, of course, is that their voices become drowned out by larger entities, impeding their ability to do what is best for their own citizens.
In a fast-changing geopolitical and economic environment – characterized by challenges like interest-rate rises spurred by high debt levels; competitive corporate-tax reductions; changing immigration patterns; and a possible slowdown in the pace of globalization – small countries must be able to identify and assess risks, and adjust their strategies accordingly.
Indeed, even without full independence, this is precisely what Scotland, which has been promised even greater autonomy within the UK than it already has, will have to do if it is to succeed.
PRINCETON – Currency chaos is back, highlighting demands for a revised international monetary order.
The rapid decline of the dollar and the pound, but also of the renminbi – now more firmly tied to the dollar than ever – is fanning tensions.
Some of the ghosts of the 1930’s have returned, too – in particular, the fear of unfair trade advantages caused by competitive devaluation.
United States Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner has already accused China of currency manipulation.
One is to have an international conference at which experts can suggest models to calculate exchange rates and politicians can negotiate deals.
The only successful instance of such an arrangement is the Bretton Woods conference in 1944, but even then the exchange rates that were fixed there proved unrealistic, and a major wave of parity alterations was soon needed (as well as the maintenance of exchange controls).
President Richard Nixon hailed the 1971 Smithsonian agreement as “the most significant monetary agreement in the history of the world.”
But it was soon in tatters, and the world moved to generalized floating.
In 1987, at the Louvre conference, there was not even any agreement about what had been concluded.
Some participants thought they had agreed to a sort of semi-fixing of exchange rates in the form of target zones, but the powerful German Bundesbank never shared that interpretation.
History suggests that collective negotiation about currencies and a new approach to the issue of reserves are unlikely to succeed.
The second, and better, approach lies in agreements in each country about what the appropriate basis for monetary policy should be.
If those agreements have widespread acceptance and mutual consistency, the result will be a stable international monetary system.
In the first, a century ago, confidence was underpinned by gold; in the more recent wave of globalization, it depended upon the power of the human intellect to solve policy problems.
The end of inflation and “the great moderation” of the past three decades were fundamental to the liberalization of large parts of the world and to increased confidence, trade, and prosperity.
The search for a monetary rule during the latter period had two phases: in the earliest attempt to construct a basis for stable monetary policy, the emphasis was on monetary targeting.
In the second, more successful, phase, an increasing number of countries adopted either explicit or implicit inflation targets.
But inflation targeting was never an obvious concept, and the financial crisis has discredited it.
In 2003, Ben Bernanke, then a Governor of the US Federal Reserve, stated in a speech that many Americans considered inflation targeting “foreign, impenetrable, and possibly slightly subversive.”
There was always uncertainty over the extent to which central banks should attempt to correct or limit asset-price bubbles when there was no corresponding rise in the general level of inflation.
Rising asset prices lead to a general increase in purchasing power, because many asset holders are willing (and able) to borrow more.
Many Europeans tried to argue in recent years that monetary policy should also take asset-price developments into account, whereas American policymakers and academics largely resisted this approach.
The problem is that asset prices and consumer-price inflation may move in different directions, as they did in the 2000’s, and that weighing both factors would produce inconsistent policy recommendations.
As a result, central banks ran the risk of no longer appearing to follow a clearly formulated policy guideline.
Formulating monetary policy has become a more complex process, but also a more politicized process, which is why it is likely to become more chaotic, with sharp differences between national approaches.
The Fed and the Bank of England remain less likely to be concerned about the emergence of new kinds of asset bubbles in stock markets or commodities.
As divergences become explicit, the demand for a wider political debate about monetary policy and for political involvement in its formulation will become more intense.
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee has often been presented as a pioneer in making monetary policy transparent.
But, from an early stage, the transparency that resulted from the early publication of who voted for and against rate increases led to a public identification of members of the Committee as hawks or doves.
If it is clear who will vote for which measure, there will be increased demand for a public debate about who should be chosen: why not elect the MPC, since it is effectively a monetary government?
In Europe, a similar debate about the political accountability of European central banks has been simmering since before the ECB was even established.
Tensions between advocates of different policy solutions will lead to a demand for a greater political say.
This exercise looks like a dramatic repeat of the interwar story, when it was impossible to obtain consensus about policy and about mutually consistent policy frameworks.
Then, too, central banks were blamed when their policy framework (at that time the gold standard) disintegrated.
Consequently, nationalization of the central bank became a major platform of the British or French left.
That, in turn, cleared the way for manipulation of currencies in the interests of exporters, businesses, and labor unions.
The result was international monetary chaos – precisely the path we are heading down now.
RIO DE JANEIRO – Ready or not, Brazil is rolling out the welcome mat for sports fans from around the world.
As soon as the clock winds down on the final FIFA World Cup soccer match in July, the country will resume preparations to host the 2016 Summer Olympics.
But, even as Brazil steps into the international spotlight, it maintains considerable barriers to the global economy, damaging its prospects for future growth and prosperity.
In a world that is constantly becoming more interconnected, Brazil risks being left behind.
Brazil has risen to become the world’s seventh-largest economy, propelled by a commodities boom, a demographic dividend, and rising consumption.
This disparity can be at least partly explained by its 43rd-place ranking for “connectedness” in terms of flows of goods, services, finance, people, and data and communications.
Sealing itself off from the bracing effects of global competition is sapping Brazil of much-needed momentum, with serious consequences for households, most of which have experienced only modest income growth in recent years.
While Brazil has halved its official poverty rate since 2003, prohibitively high consumer-goods prices and astronomical credit-card interest rates (averaging 145%) have prevented many of those who have escaped poverty from attaining middle-class lifestyles.
In order to lift half of the still-vulnerable population into the middle class, Brazil will need 4.2% annual GDP growth, on average, through 2030 – a target that can be met by tripling productivity growth.
That may be an ambitious goal, but it is achievable, especially if Brazil becomes more deeply integrated into global markets and multinational production networks.
In fact, an assessment of how global connections affect economic growth suggests that, by pursuing deeper engagement with the world, Brazil could boost its average annual rate of GDP growth by up to 1.25 percentage points.
That would propel the economy roughly one-third of the way toward higher incomes and better living standards.
With global connectivity undergoing a profound transformation, now is the time to establish key partnerships and claim market shares.
It would also reap the benefits of global competition, which would compel local firms to seek greater efficiency by implementing lean processes, investing in research and development, or adopting the latest technologies.
Global exposure makes supply chains more dynamic and enables companies to absorb more of the innovations, technologies, and ideas that are constantly emerging worldwide.
For decades, Brazil’s economic policy has drawn on the strength of its huge domestic market and protected local industries through a complex system of subsidies, taxes, and tariffs.
But exports are equivalent to only 13% of GDP, far below the level in India (24%) or Mexico (33%).
Furthermore, the sharp appreciation of the real’s exchange rate – driven by high global commodities prices – has diminished export competitiveness.
As a result, from 2005 to 2012, Brazil’s $20 billion trade surplus in manufactured goods swung to a $45 billion deficit.
To boost exports, Brazil will have to develop distinctive skills and capabilities, particularly in industries adjacent to commodities.
In the heavily protected automotive industry, high import tariffs have encouraged foreign automakers to establish factories in Brazil.
But their productivity remains low; auto plants in Mexico, for example, produce twice as many vehicles per worker.
This contrasts sharply with Brazil’s success in developing innovative and globally competitive aerospace and agricultural sectors.
One critical difference was the authorities’ emphasis on boosting R&D in these sectors before reducing the government’s direct role.
Brazil’s trade in goods also suffers from the country’s inadequate transportation and communications networks.
The rail system is limited, and only 14% of roads are paved, which is not surprising, given that Brazil’s investment in infrastructure averaged only 2.2% of GDP in 2000-2011 – well below the global average.
Brazil can improve on this record by using profits from the offshore oil fields that it is currently developing.
As for trade in services – an area where performance has been lackluster, at best – Brazil would benefit considerably from increased foreign-language proficiency, which would enable more Brazilians to conduct business abroad.
Tourism also offers significant growth potential, particularly if Brazil can build on the rare opportunity presented by hosting the World Cup and the Olympics.
Brazil’s connectedness agenda should also include efforts to attract more foreign talent.
Skilled migrants have been essential to the growth of some of the world’s leading hubs of technology and innovation – from Silicon Valley to Ireland, India, and Taiwan.
Today, only 0.5% of Brazil’s workforce is foreign-born, compared to more than 5% in the early 1900s.
Brazil also lags in terms of data and communication flows, partly because a large share of the population lacks Internet access.
With improved digital links, Brazil would gain new opportunities to improve productivity and innovation.
What better place than Brazil, with its large and growing consumer market, to incubate the next Facebook?
If that sounds farfetched, consider this: Instagram co-founder Mike Krieger is a Brazilian who left home to find his fortune in San Francisco.
Developing countries are often advised (or instructed) to undertake reforms recommended by "experts" who are called "technocrats" and are often backed by the IMF.
Opposition to the reforms they propose is usually dismissed as "populist."
Countries that fail to undertake these reforms are dismissed as craven or lacking political will, and soon suffer the consequences: higher interest rates when borrowing abroad.
But look closely at some of these "technocratic" proposals: many are more often based on ideology than economic science.
The goal is simple: to produce electricity at as low a price as possible.
They involve tradeoffs: some may lead to higher inflation but lower unemployment; some help investors, others workers.
Economists call policies where no one can be made better off without making someone else worse off Pareto efficient.
If a single policy is better than all others for everyone , i.e., has no Pareto-efficient alternatives, it is said to be Pareto dominant .
If choices among policies were purely Paretian, i.e., if no one was made worse off by choosing one policy, as against another, the choices involved would indeed be purely "technical."
In East Asia, for example, IMF bailouts helped international lenders, but hit workers and domestic firms hard.
Different policies might have imposed more risk on international lenders, and less on workers and domestic firms.
Deciding which policy to choose involves choices among values, not just technical questions about which policy is in some morally uncontroversial sense "better."
Of course, there is scope for technical analysis even when political choices are at the crux of the decision.
Technocrats can sometimes help avoid Pareto inferior policies, that is, policies that make everyone worse off.
Sometimes there are policies that can promote both growth and equality, and the job of good economists is to search for them.
The problem is that many policies advanced by technocrats as if they were Pareto efficient are in fact flawed and make many people--sometimes entire countries--worse off.
Look at the litany of technocratically inspired examples of privatization and deregulation in the 1990's.
Banking "reform," for example, frequently soon required government bail-outs, leaving a few people much richer, but the country much poorer.
These failures suggest that we should have less confidence in the supposed professional skills of technocrats--or at least less confidence than they have in themselves.
Democratic processes are likely to be more sensitive to the real consequences of policies, to the real tradeoffs involved.
Of course, some criticisms of technocratic remedies may be populist posturing, but sometimes they contain insights that ivory-towered (and usually US-trained) technocrats miss.
Consider the case of Mexico, where a proposal to raise revenue by taxing food and medicines consumed by the poor was, unsurprisingly, rejected by a democratically accountable legislature.
Rejecting this proposal was not a matter of unbridled populism.
But there is a fundamental difference between developed European countries and emerging markets: the size of the informal sector, from which VAT is not collected.
Indeed, because VAT is a tax on the formal sector--the new factories, banks, and so forth that pay regular salaries and whose incomes and expenditures can easily be traced (as distinct from those of the cash-based street vendors, village enterprises, and poor farmers)--VAT impedes development.
Developing countries that impose a VAT perversely encourage production to remain in the informal sector, which often produces the goods that are consumed domestically or used as inputs in the developed world.
But it is the formal sector that produces higher value-added manufactured goods that compete with developed countries.
There are other sources of tax revenue in many developing countries that are both more equitable and distort economic incentives far less than VAT.
Many developing countries lack a corporate income tax: the huge profits of the telecom, cement, and other monopoly sectors escape taxation.
(If one worried about double taxation, one could allow a credit for corporate taxes on individual tax returns.)
It may also be possible to impose taxes on luxury goods (many of which are imported), thereby promoting equity without stifling growth.
Economic theory supports a VAT only if one does not care about distribution and if one can impose a tax on all commodities.
You don't need an economics doctorate to recognize that, in developing countries, you can't impose a tax on all commodities.
So the next time you hear rumblings in the legislature of an emerging democratic country against this or that "technocratic" proposal, think twice before dismissing the deputies' doubts as populist rants.
Perhaps the populists are popular because they know something that the technocrats don't.
MOSCOW – Dmitry Medvedev inherited the post of President of the Russian Federation from Vladimir Putin, and while Putin moved down the pecking order to become Prime Minister, speculation has abounded from the start of Medvedev’s presidency about an eventual split between Russia’s two highest leaders.
Indeed, Putin and Medvedev have worked in perfect tandem with respect to Georgia, cooperating and skillfully performing their different roles, with Putin cast in the lead role of the menacing god of a Russian reckoning, and Medvedev in the supporting role of a possible humanitarian peacemaker.
But the Georgia crisis revealed a new strategic force in the Kremlin that opposes both Putin and Medvedev.
We still cannot name its players, but we are aware of its interests and impact on events in the same way that astronomers discern a new but invisible planet by recording its impact on known and visible objects in space.
One indication that something new is affecting Russian policy is provided by those loyal Kremlin pundits who are known for their gift of unmistakably guessing their masters’ changing moods.
One after another, they have appeared on television and radio to denounce “provokers,” whom they dare not name, for “planning the incursion of Russian troops all the way to Tbilisi and the establishment there of a pro-Russian government.”
Another indirect indication of an ongoing struggle is the uncertain behavior of the Russian military in Georgia, which apparently is the result of contradictory orders from the Kremlin.
While the Russian army seems not to have engaged in any active measures since reaching its current positions, it pointedly remains within a half-hour of Tbilisi.
The line in the sand that President George W. Bush drew on the night of August 11, warning against Russian air strikes on Tbilisi’s airport and shortly thereafter sending Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice to visit Tbilisi, provoked a split in the Kremlin.
The split divides those who are and are not concerned about the fate of Russian elites’ vast personal holdings in the West.
I call these camps, respectively, Russia’s global and national kleptocrats.
Both sides firmly agree that there is nothing that the “weakened and cowardly West” can do to restrain Russia, a nuclear and petroleum superpower, beyond financial retribution against those Russian rulers with vast assets abroad.
But the national kleptocrats seem to believe that they can live without overseas assets, or without educating their children and maintaining residences in the West.
Instead, they are content to own properties in elite residential areas around Moscow and in Russia, such as Rublyovka, Valday, and Krasnaya Polyana.
Both Putin and Medvedev (and their television propagandists) currently reflect the views and goals of the global kleptocrats.
Putin, of course, would have been glad to see Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili, his sworn enemy, put in a cage.
That said, Putin is keeping his options open to join the national plutocrats, in case their position dramatically strengthens.
If he crosses over to their side, he could even become their leader and triumphantly return to the throne that he formally abandoned only recently.
While no one yet knows the national plutocrats’ names, I believe that they are new, influential players in or associated with the Kremlin, and that they have now become bold enough to challenge both Putin and Medvedev.
Russia’s military chiefs, for whom it is psychologically difficult to be ordered by politicians to abruptly end a large-scale and successful military operation, are their natural allies.
But even if the global kleptocrats sustain their more “moderate” position on Georgia, theirs could be a Pyrrhic victory.
Every day and every hour, by means of their own propaganda, these globally minded kleptocrats, are setting the path to power for the nationalists.
In order to justify their authoritarian rule and camouflage from the Russian public their massive theft of the country’s resources, the global kleptocrats have already convinced ordinary Russians that they are surrounded by ruthless enemies who are trying to dismember and destroy Russia.
Now it is becoming increasingly difficult for them to explain why their wives and children are buying palaces in the capitals of countries that are supposedly Russia’s sworn enemies.
It would not be difficult for them to convince ordinary Russians, who have already been primed by today’s xenophobic propaganda, that Tbilisi, Sevastopol, Astana, and Tallinn belong to Russia and should be taken by force.
Putin once said that “the greatest geopolitical catastrophe of the twentieth century was the fall of the Soviet Union.”
The national kleptocrats may soon start calling for its reversal, and they are in an increasingly strong position to do so.
Civil war, famine, disease, the legacy of colonialism-all have been advanced as plausible reasons for the continent's grinding poverty and economic backwardness.
But another factor-probably related in some ways to these others-plays a fundamental role in stifling development: a lack of modern energy sources.
This is a key conclusion of the 2003/2004 African Economic Outlook, published recently by the OECD.
While almost half of Africa's 53 countries could profitably produce hydropower, only 7% of this potential is reached because of poor infrastructure and the high costs of initial investments.
Furthermore, despite its large geothermal and solar energy potential, Africa accounts for only 1.3% of the world's installed solar facilities, and only four countries have started exploiting underground heat sources.
Of the fossil energy sources - primarily oil - that African countries do exploit, only a quarter is consumed locally.
Limited energy development in Africa has resulted in one of the lowest uses of modern energy sources in the world.
More than three quarters of sub-Saharan Africans have no access to electricity, compared to fewer than 14% of Latin Americans and East Asians.
As a result, most Africans use biomass (animal and vegetable wastes and firewood) for lighting, cooking, and heating.
Families in rural and semi-rural areas often have no choice but to exploit what they perceive as a "free" energy source.
However, as populations grow and the need for energy increases, fragile ecosystems are threatened.
Clearly, African countries, assisted by their development partners, need to develop the continent's enormous energy potential as an integral part of their efforts to spur economic growth and reduce poverty.
Public and home lighting, refrigeration of food, medicine and vaccines, and heating and proper sanitation help improve people's living conditions and health.
More and higher-quality energy increases production through modernized communications, improved productivity, and a better business environment.
A secure energy supply, moreover, greatly extends learning possibilities and improves access to information.
More informed citizens, in turn, participate at a higher rate and to a greater degree in their country's decision-making processes.
Some countries have sought to bridge the gap between their energy potential and their populations' lack of access to energy.
In a few countries, private-sector participation in electricity companies, coupled with new independent regulators, has resulted in greater and more efficient power generation and higher employment, while doubling the number of subscribers.
Electrification for the rural poor has improved in South Africa and Ghana through the creation of independent agencies in charge of implementing rural electrification plans.
Similar policies need to be adopted by a greater number of countries to enable them to address their energy challenges in a more effective way.
More attention should also be given to regional and inter-regional power initiatives, which can help smooth out the uneven distribution of energy resources across countries.
Such reforms have the potential of benefiting consumers by lowering costs and improving the reliability and quality of services.
An integrated, continent-wide energy strategy, linked to national policies for growth would, indeed, go a long way toward addressing this important need.
One vehicle for promoting such an approach is the New Partnership for Africa's Development (NEPAD).
The NEPAD Heads of States Implementing Committee has asked the African Development Bank to take the lead in regional infrastructure (including transport, energy, water, etc.) and banking and financial standards.
As part of the work on regional infrastructure, the Bank has developed a short-term action plan.
Several projects, including some in the energy sector, have been prepared or are under preparation, and four have already been approved for financing by the Bank.
Projects and programs identified in the short-term action plan are estimated to cost $7 billion.
In addition, work has also started in preparing a medium to long-term action plan in close collaboration with the regional economic communities and in cooperation with the World Bank and the European Union.
The African Economic Outlook estimates that Africa's GDP growth in 2003 stood at 3.6%, significantly higher than the 2.8% recorded in 2002.
Projections for 2004 indicate that faster growth is likely to continue, or even accelerate further, for the next two or three years.
But this is still not enough: it is generally acknowledged that average growth rates of around 6-8% are required if Africa is to make real headway in curtailing poverty.
More intensive use of Africa's energy resources will necessarily be a critical component of any realistic development strategy.
As Africa looks to the future, developing its enormous energy resources - through both national and regional efforts - must be given high priority.
Indeed, boosting its energy capacity will be critical to unleashing the continent's economic and human potential.
NEW YORK – Who were those flag-waving, cheering, hollering, singing, and praying Americans who gathered in Washington DC on the last Saturday in August at a rally to “restore the honor” of the United States?
This tax-free jamboree of patriotism was ostensibly non-partisan (otherwise it could not have been tax-free).
The main organizer and speaker was Glenn Beck, the right-wing populist radio and TV personality, who promised to restore not only the nation’s honor, but “American values,” too.
The other star was Sarah Palin, the darling of the populist Tea Party crowds, who began by paying her respect to Martin Luther King, Jr.
For it was here, on this very same spot and date, that he gave his “I have a dream” speech in 1963.
She then quickly proceeded to give a long celebratory speech about the heroism of US soldiers “fighting for freedom” abroad.
It seemed an odd – and to many offensive – transition: from King’s great plea for civil rights to Palin’s sentimental clichés about the military.
But then there was something odd about the entire event, just as there is something odd about the Tea Party movement itself.
This latest surge of American populism is financed by some extremely wealthy men, including a couple of oil billionaires named David and Charles Koch, who favor cutting taxes for the super-rich and abolishing government subsidies for the poor, such as Social Security and President Barack Obama’s health-care plan.
This agenda might seem selfish, though understandable from the point of view of an oil billionaire.
But who are all those people wildly cheering for the billionaire’s dream, on of all days the anniversary of Martin Luther King’s speech?
They are almost uniformly white, largely middle-aged and above, and for the most part far from wealthy.
No doubt quite a few of them would have trouble paying the astronomical costs of American health-care bills without government assistance.
In other words, they would benefit from the publicly financed programs that the Tea Party’s sponsors wish to abolish.
And yet, there they are, denouncing as “socialism” Obama’s health-care legislation, or a slight tax increase for the richest 1% of the population.
To them, “socialism” means “European”, or simply “un-American.”
It is possible that many Americans are still so convinced that anyone who works hard will end up rich that they will support anything that favors billionaires.
But it is more likely that the grassroots of American populism are motivated by something else.
Populism everywhere is driven by fear and resentment: fear of being powerless, without status or privilege, and resentment of those – educated liberal elites, foreigners who supposedly take our jobs, and Muslims, Jews, blacks, or illegal immigrants – who seem to enjoy undeserved benefits.
Rural Americans, living on the vast plains, uprooted and isolated from the outside world, have a history of expressing their longing for community and mystical identity by gathering in large numbers in churches and tents, listening to the grand statements of charismatic hucksters.
Sarah Palin and Glenn Beck are heirs to a long line of preachers and politicians who made their fortunes by stirring up anxious crowds, promising them Heaven on Earth, or at least a place in Heaven.
In the case of Beck’s rally in Washington DC, the link with history of rural churches and religious “revival” meetings was overt.
America, after “wandering in darkness… today begins to turn back to God,” Beck declared, in the typical style of a TV evangelist.
Part of such rabble-rousers’ stock-in-trade is to conflate patriotism, freedom, and God.
This is the myth of the US, the God-blessed land of the free.
Underlying Beck’s “non-partisan” preacher’s talk about restoring American honor and values was a message that everyone in the crowd understood: such un-American elements as the liberal elites in New York and Washington, Democrats, and other God-less socialists had robbed America of its honor and values.
After the event, Beck gave an interview, in which he criticized Obama – not for his tax policies, but for having the wrong religious beliefs.
Obama, he said, believes in “liberation theology,” which means that he must be a “socialist,” thus un-American.
This is also what Palin means when she tells her Tea Party crowds that they are the “real Americans,” implying that all Americans who disagree with her views are not.
The success of the Tea Party movement has made many Democrats (and some sober Republicans) nervous.
Talk of God, freedom, and nation is not unique to right-wing radicals or Republicans.
Franklin D. Roosevelt knew how to inspire the patriotism of working men.
Barack Obama is from urban Hawaii but has all the rhetorical gifts of an old-fashioned preacher.
Alas, he has several distinct disadvantages, too: he was educated at two elite universities, his middle name is Hussein, and his father was black.
Any one of these would be a handicap at a time of rising populism, but the combination of all three is lethal.
The Tea Party movement – an economic agenda for the rich masquerading as the salvation of God-fearing white Americans – knows that all too well.
BEIJING – The slowdown of China’s economy has captured the headlines in recent weeks.
Whether it is a permanent or temporary adjustment, the Chinese authorities have much work to do in laying the groundwork for strong economic performance in the medium and long term.
Despite extraordinary growth since the start of its transition to a market economy in 1979, China is facing serious challenges simultaneously: rising inequality, large and growing levels of environmental degradation, stubborn external imbalances, and an aging society.
Fortunately, China’s 12th Five-Year Plan (2011-2015) recognizes the need to deepen market-oriented reform, change the country’s development model, and focus on the quality of growth, structural reforms, and social inclusion to overcome the rural-urban divide and stem the rise in income inequality.
In line with this bold, long-term approach, a new report, China 2030: Building a Modern, Harmonious, and Creative High-Income Society, proposes reforms that my country needs to develop a mature, well-functioning market economy by 2030.
Commemorating the 30th anniversary of China’s membership, World Bank President Robert B. Zoellick proposed to the country’s leaders a joint effort to identify and analyze China’s medium-term development challenges.
China 2030 calls for structural reforms that would redefine the role of government, overhaul state-owned enterprises and banks, develop the private sector, promote competition, and deepen liberalization of the land, labor, and financial markets.
While providing relatively fewer tangible public goods and services directly, the Chinese government will need to provide more intangible public goods and services like rules, standards, and policies.
Such policies and institutional improvements increase productivity, promote competition, facilitate specialization, enhance the efficiency of resource allocation, protect the environment, and reduce risks and uncertainties.
In the enterprise sector, the focus will need to be on increasing competition in all sectors, reducing barriers to entry and exit for private companies, and strengthening state-owned enterprises’ competitiveness.
In the financial sector, the banking system must be commercialized, thereby gradually allowing interest rates to be set by market forces, while capital markets must be deepened in tandem with the development of the legal and supervisory infrastructure needed to ensure financial stability.
In the labor market, China needs to accelerate reforms of the hukou (household registration) system to ensure that, by 2030, workers can move more freely in response to market signals.
Currently, anyone who moves to another part of the country without a hukou risks losing access to education, social services, and the housing market.
China’s policymakers also need to introduce measures to increase labor-force participation rates, rethink wage policy, and make social-insurance programs portable nationwide.
Finally, farmers’ rights need to be protected, the efficiency of land use must be increased, and policies for acquisition of rural land for urban use should be overhauled.
China’s medium-term success will also require creating an open system in which competitive pressures encourage Chinesecompanies to engage in product and processinnovation, not only through their ownresearch-and-development efforts, but also through participationin global Rampamp;Dnetworks.
The priority is to increase the quality of Rampamp;D, rather than just its quantity.
Policymakers will need to focus on increasing the technical and cognitive skills of university graduates, and on building a few world-class research universities with strong links to industry.
An enlightened strategy must encourage China to “grow green,” as opposed to growing rapidly now and facing massive environmental costs later.
Encouraging new investments in low-pollution, energy- and resource-efficient industries would lead to greener development, spur investments in related upstream and downstream manufacturing and services, and build an international competitive advantage in a global sunrise industry.
China 2030 also calls for expanding opportunities, promoting social security, and reducing the country’s relatively high social and economic inequality by addressing the rural-urban disparities in access to jobs, finance, and high-quality public services.
Doing so will require greater sustained attention to underserved rural areas and migrant populations, and to restructuring social policies in order to ensure secure safety nets.
Moreover, it is vital to strengthen China’s fiscal positionby mobilizing additional revenues and ensuring that local governments have adequate financing to meet their rising expenditure responsibilities.
Such reforms can help to ensure that budgetary resources are available at different levels of government (central, provincial, prefectural, county, township, and village), and are commensurate with expenditure responsibilities.
Last but not least, China should become a proactive stakeholder in the global economy.
By continuing to intensify its global trade, investment, and financial links, which have served it well over the past three decades, China would benefit from further specialization, increased investment opportunities, and higher returns to capital, as well as mutually beneficial flows of ideas and knowledge.
China must remain committed to resuscitating the stalled Doha Round of multilateral trade negotiations, and support a global agreement on investment flows.
Global integration of China’s financial sector will require opening the capital account, which will have to be carried out steadily and with considerable care; but it will be a key step toward internationalizing the renminbi as a global reserve currency.
The proposals contained in China 2030 could provide a framework for Chinese policymakers as they seek to achieve their goal of sustainable and harmonious growth.
With the global economy entering a dangerous phase, China’s government will need to respond to new risks, shocks, and vulnerabilities as they arise.
But, in doing so, it should adhere to the principle that policy responses to short-term problems must uphold, not undermine, long-term reform priorities.
Two years ago the world cheered as Slobodan Miloševic's opponents united to overthrow his dictatorship.
Opposition to Milosevic, however, appears to have been the sole glue holding them together.
Those protest leaders, now in power, have been at each other's throats ever since.
Vojislav Koštunica, the current president of what remains of Yugoslavia and the `mildish' nationalist who out-polled Miloševic two years ago, holds a high-profile job with numerous ceremonial duties but little real power.
So he decided to compete head-to-head in Serbia's presidential elections of September 29 with the reform candidate Miroljub Labus, a vice-premier in charge of finance.
Because Koštunica did not win 50% plus one of the votes of all registered voters in the first round, he faces a run-off with Labus on October 13th.
Intelligent speeches, spirited debates and clever slogans were conspicuous by their absence in this election.
For example, Zoran Djindjic, the hyper-pragmatic prime minister of Serbia who supports Labus, called Koštunica a lazy drone.
Such language is lamentable, but it is still a big step forward from the Miloševic era, when both regime and opposition commonly dubbed their opponents as traitors, spies, or Western mercenaries.
Look beyond the insults and you see that Koštunica and Labus have similar moderate programs.
Labus favors faster economic reform and is readier to accept Western demands to cooperate with the Hague Tribunal.
Koštunica is also for privatization and decreasing the role of the state, but he is more worried about corruption and favoritism during the sale of state firms.
While he claims to be pro-Western, he prefers that extraditions of indicted Serb war criminals to the Hague conform to Serbian law.
The biggest electoral surprise of the first round was the success of the blood-curdling nationalist Vojislav Sešelj, who received 24% of the vote.
For years he championed extreme Serbian nationalism and led paramilitary formations in the wars of Yugoslavia's disintegration.
Last but not least, Sešelj was in coalition with Miloševic when the Democratic Opposition of Serbia, a loose coalition of 18 opposition parties led by Koštunica but internally dominated by Djindjic, defeated Miloševic.
He remains a nationalist, but the main theme of his electoral campaign was the struggle against organized crime and his promise to purge the police of dishonest high-ranking officers.
Sešelj was much helped by Miloševic who, from his cell in the Hague, urged his Socialist Party to vote for Sešelj, not for one of its own two quarrelling candidates.
Miloševic's shrewd, pugnacious cross-examination of witnesses in the Hague courtroom has somewhat restored his prestige among Serbs who perceive the Tribunal as anti-Serb.
The good news is that Miloševic's support for Sešelj damaged the already weak Socialist Party, which is unlikely to recover soon.
Sešelj was also the only major politician who spoke about the plight of the unemployed and the soon-to-be-unemployed, of the refugees and the homeless, and of the poor.
He did this in a demagogical, nationalistic and populist way.
But it is obvious that in the period of transition through which Serbia is going, there is a need for a strong, well-organized European-style social-democratic party to address these issues.
Most of Sešelj's supporters will vote for Koštunica in the second round because they view Labus as a lackey of Americans and Germans, of the IMF and World Bank, and simply of Serbia's enemies the world over.
Since most people who voted for the eight minor candidates in the first round will also cast ballots for Koštunica, he is all but certain to win.
This certainty means that Koštunica need not actively court Sešelj supporters or other nationalists.
Koštunica has made a career more by the absence of negative characteristics than by what he has achieved.
He is neither corrupt nor a war criminal, neither aggressive in his utterance and behavior nor likely to bend the law for the sake of personal power.
Many people voted by for him by default, both now and when he defeated Miloševic in 2000.
Though he does not sacrifice major moral principles for power, Koštunica is not the unassuming lawyer he once was.
He crams his party with mediocrities, selects mostly bad advisers, and does not listen to the rare good ones.
It is possible that his image as a right-of-center democrat conceals a reactionary who would like for Serbia to restore its pre-WWII monarchy and for the Orthodox Church to play a major role in political and social life.
For there is a deep contradiction at the core of Koštunica, as there is at the core of Serbian society - an impossible dream of combining liberal European political institutions with authoritarian Serbian political traditions.
It should not be forgotten that Koštunica supported the struggle of Serbs in Croatia, Bosnia and Kosovo and that he adheres to a rosy picture of Serb history.
After the parliamentary elections that will probably take place in the spring of 2003, Koštunica's Democratic Party of Serbia (DSS) will be a formidable force in the Serbian assembly.
Neither Serbs nor the West want a government in which Sešelj or someone like him plays a leading role.
So Koštunica and Djindjic cannot seek allies in the nationalist camp.
Both Djindjic and Koštunica must ultimately realize that they are stuck with each other and so begin to compromise and cooperate.
If they do Serbia will sail on - slowly, without spectacular successes, in a disorderly way, but peacefully and in the right direction.
LONDON – The politics of economic anxiety has now driven the electorates of the United Kingdom and the United States into the hands of populists.
If only, so the received wisdom goes, economies could get back to a more “normal” rate of GDP and productivity growth, life would improve for more people, anti-establishment sentiment would wane, and politics would return to “normal” as well.
That period is over, and the forces that sustained it are unlikely to align again anytime soon.
Technological innovation and demographics are now a headwind, not a tailwind, for growth, and financial engineering can’t save the day.
The aberrant period in history is the hundred or so years after the US Civil War, during which breakthroughs in energy, electrification, telecommunications, and transportation fundamentally reshaped societies.
The global population grew over 50% between 1800 and 1900, and then more than doubled over the following 50 years, with economies growing much faster than in previous centuries.
By the end of the 1970s, growth began to slow in many of the developed Western economies, and US President Ronald Reagan and Federal Reserve Chair Alan Greenspan ushered in a debt cycle that supercharged activity.
The US, until then a net creditor to the world, became a net borrower, with China and other emerging markets benefiting from America’s rising trade deficit.
But policymakers don’t like to see growth slow, and central bankers exhausted their toolkits in an attempt to stimulate economic activity despite insufficient demand.
With less and less yield to be found in traditional fixed-income assets, investors piled into risk assets of all forms, driving up their price; the rich got richer, and the middle class was left further behind.
As growth in the real economy continued to stagnate, angry populism surged, resulting in Brexit and President-elect Trump.
For all that central bankers have done to revive economic growth, the forces of demographics and innovation have worked against them.
Most of today’s (and tomorrow’s) demographic growth is in Africa, where it doesn’t drive global productivity to the extent that it does elsewhere.
Even as the likes of Uber and Amazon, and, more fundamentally, robotics, add convenience, they do so by displacing working-class jobs and/or driving down wages.
This is typical of the process of “creative destruction” that Joseph Schumpeter famously described as being the handmaiden of growth in capitalist economies.
Then comes a wave of displacement, as the technology is adapted to existing industries.
Three decades ago, it was Wal-Mart using computers and logistics to wipe out small “mom and pop” stores; today, it is Amazon taking on Wal-Mart.
The third wave is the widespread diffusion of the innovation in ways that lift overall productivity and living standards.
Or, as the Nobel laureate economist Robert Solow observed in 1987, “You can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics.”
Northwestern University’s Robert Gordon has argued that the economic impact of today’s innovations doesn’t hold a candle to that of plumbing or electricity.
Perhaps, or it may be that we are at an early stage of the Schumpeterian cycle of innovation (enriching a few) and destruction (creating anxiety in vulnerable sectors).
Eventually, average productivity and real incomes are likely to benefit as breakthrough technologies enable new kinds of growth.
The problem is that it may take a decade or longer before robotics and the like feed a broader rising tide that lifts all boats.
And whether Schumpeter or Gordon is right is irrelevant for politicians facing angry voters whose standard of living has declined.
Today, their fed-up constituents reject globalization; tomorrow, they may become Luddites.
The question now is whether a shift in focus from unconventional monetary policies to Keynesian demand management can save the day.
It is widely assumed that monetary policy is a spent force in the US and Europe, and that fiscal stimulus and expansion – for example, via tax cuts and infrastructure spending – must take over.
Recent developments, particularly in Europe, suggest that such strategies will be difficult to implement.
In the US, Trump’s victory, coupled with Republican majorities in both houses of Congress, paves the way for tax cuts and increased defense spending.
But fiscal expansion is likely to meet resistance from monetary policy, as the Fed resumes its “normalization” of interest rates.
Still, the hope is that faster US growth and rising wages will quell voters’ populist rebellion.
The onus, ironically, will remain on the Fed to “do the right thing” – namely, to normalize interest rates with extreme caution, while allowing the share of labor income in GDP to rise, even if that requires some overshooting of inflation.
To paraphrase Dylan Thomas, we believers in markets should not go gently into the populist night.
We should fight against the dying of the light of global capitalism with every tool we can muster.
Rather, it harks back to an “old normal,” last experienced in the 1930s.
Whatever the right way forward for the global economy, we know that it cannot mean a return to the isolationism and protectionism of that era.
For some time I thought that the Twenty-Second Amendment to the United States Constitution was probably the best way to ensure that political leaders do not overstay their welcome, and, just as importantly, wear out their effectiveness.
This Amendment bars US Presidents from holding office for more than two four-year terms.
Perhaps I had forgotten the travails of President George W. Bush’s predecessors in their second term, but his own current predicament shows that the constitutional limit has its own problems.
For one thing, it makes the President a lame duck sometime in his second term.
Does anyone remember that after his re-election Bush promised to reform the pension system (“Social Security”)?
Now he is clearly hamstrung not only by the Democratic opposition, but also, and perhaps more so, by the succession struggles within his own party.
However, the fate of Bush’s friend, British Prime Minister Tony Blair, shows that lame-duck status can occur even without a constitutional term limit – indeed, without a written constitution at all.
Blair made the fatal mistake of setting his own limit to his tenure of office by saying that he would not contest a fourth election as leader of the Labour Party.
But, even without such a vow, he would find it difficult after nine years in office to combine a program of reform with a sense of what can be achieved given the mood of his party and of the country.
Indeed, reforms announced by Blair increasingly sound like empty promises, because the apparently inevitable has happened: the Prime Minister has lost touch with the public.
What used to be his charisma is now the permanent re-enactment of the all-too-familiar.
Some have done so, more or less voluntarily, only to re-emerge suddenly from oblivion.
Can it be the same President Oscar Arias who (barely) won the recent presidential election in Costa Rica and now returns to power after 20 years?
And was not Silvio Berlusconi’s candidate for the presidency of the Italian Senate, Giulio Andreotti, a junior member of one of Italy’s first post-1945 governments?
Did Portugal’s Cavaco Silva, the successful Prime Minister of the 1990’s, have to reappear as President in 2006?
Who can forget Margaret Thatcher’s tears when her “friends” told her that her time was up?
When Prime Minister Harold Wilson suddenly resigned in 1976 and left No. 10 Downing Street to the late James Callaghan, people became suspicious: had he been forced out by some secret service plot concerning South Africa?
It appears that there is no way for political leaders to leave the scene gracefully.
Even if there is an “orderly transition” – a term much used about Tony Blair and Gordon Brown at the moment – it is accompanied by sorrow, or at least by pain.
Abandoning the habit involves not only the inconvenience of losing perks and a certain lifestyle, but also the loss of power.
Power may be increasingly illusory in a globalized world, but it is an illusion that is shared by others, and the longer one inhabits it, the more one’s circle consists of others who share the belief.
The addiction to political office is always worrisome, because democracies turn into autocracies when leaders cease to recognize the limits of their power.
Disconnection is the beginning, followed by the belief that one is the only person who knows what is right and good.
When Tony Blair says that the most important liberty is security from terrorist attacks, he has forgotten the first principles of his party and his country.
Overstaying one’s welcome may be the professional disease of political leaders, but it is above all incompatible with democracy as a framework for bringing about change without violence.
The question, then, is whether there is any way to ensure that political leaders leave in time.
While the US Constitution shows the limits of institutional safeguards, the role of political parties is clearly significant when it comes to limiting terms in power.
Like Thatcher, Blair now hears from his party that he should go and replies that “the people” still want him.
Yet the party might have a better sense of what is viable not just today, but also tomorrow – at the next election, for example.
In the end, there is no foolproof method to guarantee that political leaders leave without tears.
What matters is that mechanisms are in place that do make them leave, probably rather too late, and certainly with some pain and unhappiness, but in time for the constitution of liberty to remain intact.
But that doesn’t mean that issues involving the preservation of life (or a way of life), like defense, should not be subjected to cool, hard economic analysis.
Shortly before the current Iraq war, when Bush administration economist Larry Lindsey suggested that the costs might range between $100 and $200 billion, other officials quickly demurred.
For example, Office of Management and Budget Director Mitch Daniels put the number at $60 billion.
Concerned that the Bush administration might be misleading everyone about the Iraq war’s costs, just as it had about Iraq’s weapons of mass destruction and connection with Al Qaida, I teamed up with Linda Bilmes, a budget expert at Harvard, to examine the issue.
Even we, as opponents of the war, were staggered by what we found, with conservative to moderate estimates ranging from slightly less than a trillion dollars to more than $2 trillion.
Our analysis starts with the $500 billion that the Congressional Budget Office openly talks about, which is still ten times higher than what the administration said the war would cost.
Its estimate falls so far short because the reported numbers do not even include the full budgetary costs to the government.
And the budgetary costs are but a fraction of the costs to the economy as a whole.
For example, the Bush administration has been doing everything it can to hide the huge number of returning veterans who are severely wounded – 16,000 so far, including roughly 20% with serious brain and head injuries.
So it is no surprise that its figure of $500 billion ignores the lifetime disability and healthcare costs that the government will have to pay for years to come.
Nor does the administration want to face up to the military’s recruiting and retention problems.
The result is large re-enlistment bonuses, improved benefits, and higher recruiting costs – up 20% just from 2003 to 2005.
Moreover, the war is extremely wearing on equipment, some of which will have to be replaced.
These budgetary costs (exclusive of interest) amount to $652 billion in our conservative estimate and $799 billion in our moderate estimate.
Arguably, since the government has not reined in other expenditures or increased taxes, the expenditures have been debt financed, and the interest costs on this debt add another $98 billion (conservative) to $385 billion (moderate) to the budgetary costs.
Of course, the brunt of the costs of injury and death is borne by soldiers and their families.
But the military pays disability benefits that are markedly lower than the value of lost earnings.
Similarly, payments for those who are killed amount to only $500,000, which is far less than standard estimates of the lifetime economic cost of a death, sometimes referred to as the statistical value of a life ($6.1 to $6.5 million).
The Bush administration once claimed that the Iraq war would be good for the economy, with one spokesperson even suggesting that it was the best way to ensure low oil prices.
As in so many other ways, things have turned out differently: the oil companies are the big winners, while the American and global economies are losers.
Being extremely conservative, we estimate the overall effect on the economy if only $5 or $10 of the increase is attributed to the war.
At the same time, money spent on the war could have been spent elsewhere.
We estimate that if a proportion of that money had been allocated to domestic investment in roads, schools, and research, the American economy would have been stimulated more in the short run, and its growth would have been enhanced in the long run.
There are a number of other costs, some potentially quite large, although quantifying them is problematic.
For instance, Americans pay some $300 billion annually for the “option value” of military preparedness – being able to fight wherever needed.
That Americans are willing to pay this suggests that the option value exceeds the costs.
But there is little doubt that the option value has been greatly impaired and will likely remain so for several years.
In short, even our “moderate” estimate may significantly underestimate the cost of America’s involvement in Iraq.
And our estimate does not include any of the costs implied by the enormous loss of life and property in Iraq itself.
We do not attempt to explain whether the American people were deliberately misled regarding the war’s costs, or whether the Bush administration’s gross underestimate should be attributed to incompetence, as it vehemently argues is true in the case of weapons of mass destruction.
Nor do we attempt to assess whether there were more cost-effective ways of waging the war.
Recent evidence that deaths and injuries would have been greatly reduced had better body armor been provided to troops suggests how short-run frugality can lead to long-run costs.
Certainly, when a war’s timing is a matter of choice, as in this case, inadequate preparation is even less justifiable.
Elaborate cost-benefit analyses of major projects have been standard practice in the defense department and elsewhere in government for almost a half-century.
The Iraq war was an immense “project,” yet it now appears that the analysis of its benefits was greatly flawed and that of its costs virtually absent.
One cannot help but wonder: were there alternative ways of spending a fraction of the war’s $1-$2 trillion in costs that would have better strengthened security, boosted prosperity, and promoted democracy?
BERLIN – Suppose that a company’s board is seeking a new CEO.
After an agonizingly long search, its members decide to go with a newcomer to the industry, claiming that the candidate will make the firm the market leader again.
And, indeed, the new CEO shows up with big plans, spending the first six months dismantling and castigating past policies and practices, sometimes without rhyme or reason.
The CEO hires “yes men,” perhaps old colleagues, friends, or even relatives.
Possessing as little experience as the CEO and plenty of incentive to curry favor, they do not offer sound counsel.
Add to that a lack of transparency, together with apparent violations of business ethics and basic leadership principles, and the CEO’s credibility quickly wanes.
The company’s skilled and experienced executives soon become frustrated with the new guard, and leave within a few months.
This flight fuels a broader sense of fear and uncertainty among everyone from investors to employees, which is reinforced as it becomes apparent that the CEO isn’t fulfilling promises made during the interview process.
It becomes clear that the CEO was hired on the basis of nothing more than bluster.
At that point, the board would be expected to step up and censure, if not fire, the failed CEO.
If they do not move quickly enough, there is a broad cohort of whistleblowers, unions, consumer advocates, and others to give them the needed push, serving as a system of checks and balances.
Trump fancies himself America’s CEO; indeed, he won the presidency partly because he pitched himself as a successful business tycoon.
So he should be held to the same standard as a CEO of a large public multinational company – a standard that is going up, owing to increased scrutiny of corporate governance practices (despite Trump’s deregulation efforts).
In his first six months as president, Trump has wrought far more damage than any single CEO could.
He has faced a constant stream of scandalous revelations regarding his inner circle’s ties with Russia.
In fact, every week, it seems, some new development emerges that, alone or in concert with the rest, would get a CEO fired.
For example, if any CEO walked into a meeting as ill-informed and poorly briefed as Trump often is, breezily spouting empty superlatives and faulty information, they would have quickly lost respect outside the company and support within it.
Just ask Elizabeth Holmes of Theranos, who attempted to build her blood-testing company on hot air and ended up losing all credibility.
In business, the emperor is quickly told the truth about his new clothes – unless, that is, it is a family business of the sort that Trump ran and frequently bankrupted.
The Trump administration is just such a “business,” which means that its senior employees have no alternative but to resign in the face poor (or even law-defying) management.
White House press secretary Sean Spicer was the first to throw in the towel – after barely six months on the job.
Moreover, the old boys’ club is giving way to an environment of greater accountability in business.
Gone are the days when CEOs could disrespect female colleagues and contacts with impunity.
Yet, as with the appalling comments he made before becoming president, Trump has recently gotten away with insulting an Irish reporter (by interrupting a call with Ireland’s prime minister to discuss her appearance) and the wife of France’s president, on whose physique he commented.
In the business world, a pattern like this would be noted, and eventually the company would be forced to take action.
If the CEO of American Apparel couldn’t get away with such harassment, why should the president of the United States?
Likewise, why should Trump be able to play fast and loose with people’s health and wellbeing, attempting to bully his own colleagues in Congress to agree to a health-care bill that would take away coverage from millions?
When Martin Shkreli, the former CEO of Turing Pharmaceuticals, hiked the price of the toxoplasmosis drug Daraprim – a lifesaving treatment for AIDS patients – from $13.50 per tablet to $750, his reputation tanked.
He resigned in the wake of allegations that he appropriated company funds for personal use at previous companies where he worked.
By contrast, Trump remains safe in his position as president, partly owing to the seemingly bottomless loyalty of many of his supporters.
During the campaign, he proclaimed that even if he stood in the middle of Manhattan’s Fifth Avenue and shot somebody, he wouldn’t lose any voters.
And, for once, his claim wasn’t mere bluster: a recent poll indicated that 45% of Trump voters would still support him if he shot someone.
But Trump’s overall approval rating has fallen substantially, reaching lows that only two previous presidents have touched in the first six months in office.
That means that there is a more fundamental problem at play: America’s system of checks and balances has so far failed to work as effectively as the US – and the world – needs it to.
Corporate governance is becoming stricter, based on a growing recognition of companies’ responsibility to ensure safe working environments, bar child labor, prevent environmental destruction, and end other damaging practices.
WASHINGTON, DC – As US President Donald Trump decamped to his mansion-cum-private club in Palm Beach, Florida, for the holidays, he left Washington, DC, on edge.
It’s obvious that Trump and his strong allies in Congress – he has more than one might expect – are determined to torpedo what’s supposed to be an independent legal inquiry into whether Trump and his campaign colluded with Russia in its efforts to defeat Hillary Clinton in 2016.
The Trump camp’s behavior toward Special Counsel Robert Mueller and the FBI, which is aiding Mueller’s investigation, makes Richard Nixon and his aides’ behavior toward the Watergate investigators look tame and respectful by comparison.
Although Nixon did fire the first independent prosecutor, Archibald Cox, in the infamous “Saturday Night Massacre,” another was installed and Nixon ultimately resigned rather than face impeachment by the House of Representatives and conviction by the Senate.
(In that case, he would have had to leave office without a valuable pension.)
Oddly, Trump and his advisers seem not to have learned from more recent history, either.
In firing FBI director James Comey, Trump opened himself up to the appointment of a special counsel.
But most observers believe that key Republicans in the House of Representatives, where impeachment would begin, have thrown in their lot with Trump, mainly because they fear his loyal base (about a third of the country, clustered in many congressional districts).
That could change if the Democrats take over the House in next November’s midterm elections.
But even if the Democrats won both houses of Congress, they would most likely be unable to muster the two-thirds majority needed to convict Trump in the Senate.
One strong possibility is that the president would be charged with obstructing justice – both an impeachable offense and a crime.
A criminal charge of obstruction requires proof of intent to convict, but Trump’s serial efforts to impinge on or halt the investigation suggest that he worries that he would be vulnerable.
Whether a president can actually be indicted is an unsettled question; but if Mueller believes that the president shouldn’t be indicted, he would submit his charges to the House, which would then decide whether to proceed with impeachment.
Trump is determined to head off both outcomes, and he’s clearly worried that he might fail.
Mueller has run a disciplined and tight-lipped shop, free of leaks; but it’s widely expected that Trump’s son-in-law, Jared Kushner, will be indicted.
That may explain why Trump is treading where Nixon never dared to go, by trying to smear both Mueller and the FBI.
But Trump has been frustrated by the warnings he has received that firing Mueller would set off a political firestorm.
(Because Deputy Attorney General Rod Rosenstein must make the call to dismiss Mueller, and has said that he sees no reason to do so, Trump would first have to fire Rosenstein, which would look too much like the Saturday Night Massacre, the turning point in Nixon’s presidency.)
So, by raising questions about Mueller’s integrity and that of the FBI, Trump and his allies are trying to set the stage for a widespread public dismissal of whatever Mueller reports.
His right-wing allies in the House of Representatives (even more partisan than the Senate) have subjected the new FBI director, Christopher Wray, to hostile questioning in various committee hearings.
And they have grilled the deputy director, Andrew McCabe – who was close to Comey and could verify his claims that Trump tried to persuade him to limit the investigation – for eight and nine hours at a time.
The bullying of senior Justice Department and FBI officials by House committees has been without precedent since the anti-communist witch hunts of the 1950s.
This strategy seeks to force the dismissal or reassignment of troublesome FBI and Justice officials.
McCabe will reportedly retire in 2018, and a recent poll showed a significant drop in public support for Mueller’s investigation over the past six months.
No one can be sure that Trump won’t take some dramatic action – whether related to international affairs or to the Russia investigation – during his sojourn in Palm Beach.
While Trump continues to succumb to Vladimir Putin’s blandishments (retired US intelligence official James Clapper recently remarked that Putin, a former KGB agent, is a great case officer in his handling of Trump), US relations with Russia are deteriorating.
Russian submarines have been trolling near vital Western communications cables on the Atlantic Ocean floor, implying a risk of serious damage to the US and European economies and way of life.
In response, NATO plans to establish a new command center to monitor such activities.
Moreover, the Trump administration recently announced that it would permit the sale of lethal defensive weapons to Ukraine, to counter Russian aggression there – a move that Russia says will only beget more violence.
Then there’s North Korea, with which a war is quite possible, according to some retired military officials.
Trump is known to be volatile and impulsive, but so far his major advisers have restrained him.
They work hard at this, trying to avoid taking actions or telling him things that might upset him.
But the constellation of foreign-policy and intelligence officials around Trump is understood to be about to change.
It is widely expected that Secretary of State Rex Tillerson will be replaced by a more hawkish figure early in 2018.
An exodus of White House staff members has begun, owing to dissatisfaction on their or Trump’s part.
Even if we get through the holidays in relative peace, it’s clear that 2018 will be a tumultuous year.
WASHINGTON, DC – When Pope Francis visited Latin America in July, he made an impassioned plea for the protection of the Amazon rainforest and the people who live there.
“Our common home is being pillaged, laid waste and harmed with impunity,” he told activists gathered in Bolivia for the World Meeting of Popular Movements.
Heeding Francis’s call for action is not only a moral issue; it is a practical one.
When world leaders meet at the United Nations Climate Change Conference in Paris later this year to craft a response to the challenges of global warming, they should put in place policies to protect tropical forests and the people who make them their home.
Franciscan, Jesuit, and Dominican priests have been spreading the gospel in the region for centuries.
What makes Francis’s appeal different is that his words were directed not so much at the local population, but at the residents of North America and Europe, where demand for timber, biofuels, and agricultural products drives the destruction of the rainforests and imperils the lives of indigenous populations.
Communities in the Amazon have suffered grievously from the economic incentives to cut down the rainforests.
Around the world, indigenous people are being threatened, murdered, and driven from their homelands.
In September 2014, for example, Edwin Chota and three other leaders of the Asháninka communities in Peru, were brutally murdered, most likely by illegal loggers.
Two months later, José Isidro Tendetza Antún, a leader of the Shuar people in Ecuador, was tortured and killed while headed to a protest against a mining project that threatened his people’s homeland.
In addition to being an affront to human rights, deforestation and the accompanying assault on indigenous cultures is a serious threat to the fight against climate change.
The links between the loss of forest cover and global warming has been well documented.
Carbon-dioxide emissions from forest clearing and burning account for nearly 10% of global emissions.
Meanwhile, forest people have demonstrated that they are often the best guardians of the trees on which their livelihoods depend.
The forests where indigenous people live often hold more carbon than those managed by any other owners, public or private.
Indeed, indigenous reserves in the Brazilian Amazon have played a critical role in lowering deforestation rates – at a considerable cost.
In the past 12 years, more activists and indigenous leaders have been killed in Brazil than in any other country.
During the proceedings in Paris later this year, countries will be expected to present national plans – known as Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDCs) – outlining the specific steps they will take to reduce CO2 emissions.
If Francis’s appeal is to be respected, these steps must include commitments to help indigenous people secure the right to their land and empower them to protect their forests against destruction.
So far, only a little more than one-quarter of the world’s countries have submitted preliminary INDCs for review.
Unfortunately, few countries with tropical forests have submitted their plans, and not one of the Amazon countries has done so.
The government has used its INDC to set several ambitious goals, including commitments to zero deforestation by the year 2030 and to restoring forest ecosystems in the country’s watersheds.
And yet, while Mexico has relatively strong formal land and property rights for indigenous peoples and local communities, those rights have yet to be integrated with other regulations – hindering any kind of economic development.
Industrialized countries, such as the United States and the members of the European Union, bear a special responsibility for providing solutions to the problem of deforestation.
Forest communities must be provided with assistance in managing their resources and maintaining their livelihoods.
The Green Climate Fund, established by the United Nations to help developing countries mitigate CO2 emissions and adapt to climate change, should include provisions specifically for indigenous people, along the lines of the Climate Investment Fund’s Dedicated Grant Mechanism.
Francis’s upcoming trips will include visits to Washington, DC and Paris, where he is expected to continue his advocacy on behalf of the environment.
It is up to our leaders to answer his call and turn prayers into policy.
SINGAPORE – With his shocking victory in the US presidential election, Donald Trump has made history – and made a lot of people very afraid.
In fact, his rise threatens to incite a revolution that shakes the foundations not only of American politics, but also of global peace and prosperity.
Throughout his campaign, Trump espoused an “America first” worldview, emphasizing that he would follow through on US international commitments only when it suits him.
This has rattled many a US ally and partner, including the countries of Southeast Asia, which fear that they will be all but ignored by a key guarantor of stability in their neighborhood.
This would represent a notable reversal from the last eight years, during which President Barack Obama made a concerted effort to deepen America’s ties with Southeast Asia.
Under Obama’s stewardship, the US acceded to the Treaty of Amity and Cooperation in Southeast Asia, and joined the East Asia Summit.
Moreover, in 2013, the US became the first ASEAN dialogue partner to establish a permanent mission to the organization.
And, earlier this year, Obama hosted the first US-ASEAN summit on American soil.
Obama also brought four ASEAN members into the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), a mega-regional trade deal that would promote US economic exchange with the region.
Obama also helped to cement bilateral ties with most countries in the region, visiting nine out of ten during his two terms in office.
Had a US government shutdown not forced him to cancel a trip to Brunei in 2013, he would have had a perfect record.
To be sure, America’s ties with Thailand and the Philippines have deteriorated somewhat during Obama’s second term, owing to the US president’s criticism of violations of democratic norms and human rights in both countries.
But that regression has been more than offset by progress in America’s relationships with Indonesia, Laos, Myanmar, Singapore, and especially Vietnam.
Obama’s efforts in Southeast Asia were all part of his broader strategic “pivot” to Asia, announced in 2011.
Aimed at helping the US to maintain its strategic primacy in the Asia-Pacific region, the policy has been quietly welcomed by most regional actors, as it dovetails with their desire to check China’s hegemonic ambitions in the region.
Trump is likely to focus overwhelmingly on domestic issues, at the expense of America’s strategic interests abroad.
Indeed, he may well back away from strategic engagement with ASEAN and its members, causing their relationships with the US to deteriorate.
If he fails to show up at important regional meetings like the East Asian Summits, that deterioration will become even more pronounced.
To be sure, Malaysia, Thailand, and the Philippines may prefer a US president who does not trouble himself to criticize their governments’ human-rights abuses, corruption, or constitutional shenanigans.
But US relations with other countries in the region may stall, if not deteriorate, as confidence in Trump’s willingness to follow through on US commitments collapses.
Under Trump, who has revealed strong protectionist tendencies, the TPP will stay moribund, at best.
The US-ASEAN Connect initiative, which Obama proposed at the summit earlier this year, and which aims to boost America’s economic engagement with the regional grouping, may also go nowhere.
Australia, India, and Japan – key US allies and security partners in the Asia-Pacific region – may also find it difficult to connect with Trump, further undermining faith in the US-led regional security architecture.
The strategic rebalancing toward Asia that Obama worked so hard to advance may be thrown into reverse, dealing a heavy blow to Asia and the US alike.
Although Trump has criticized China extensively for supposedly stealing American jobs – and even blamed it for creating the “hoax” of climate change – he may take a softer stance on Chinese strategic expansionism in the region, especially in the South China Sea, than Obama did.
In a far-fetched but not implausible scenario, Trump may even strike a deal with China over its territorial claims, disregarding the interests of US allies, from Japan to the Philippines.
Such a move would be particularly devastating to perceptions of Trump’s America in Southeast Asia.
Once in the White House, a heavily advised Trump may realize that maintaining some continuity in America’s foreign policy, particularly in the Asia-Pacific, is more in line with US interests than the alternative.
If nothing else, Trump may resist the idea of China gaining strategic primacy in the region.
For Trump, who made his career in real estate, perhaps the best way to look at it is in business terms.
The US would be remiss to squander all the significant investment that his predecessor has made in Southeast Asia.
NEW YORK – Developing countries are bracing for a major slowdown this year.
According to the UN report World Economic Situation and Prospects 2016, their growth averaged only 3.8% in 2015 – the lowest rate since the global financial crisis in 2009 and matched in this century only by the recessionary year of 2001.
And what is important to bear in mind is that the slowdown in China and the deep recessions in the Russian Federation and Brazil only explain part of the broad falloff in growth.
True, falling demand for natural resources in China (which accounts for nearly half of global demand for base metals) has had a lot to do with the sharp declines in these prices, which have hit many developing and emerging economies in Latin America and Africa hard.
Indeed, the UN report lists 29 economies that are likely to be badly affected by China’s slowdown.
And the collapse of oil prices by more than 60% since July 2014 has undermined the growth prospects of oil exporters.
The real worry, however, is not just falling commodity prices, but also massive capital outflows.
During 2009-2014, developing countries collectively received a net capital inflow of $2.2 trillion, partly owing to quantitative easing in advanced economies, which pushed interest rates there to near zero.
The search for higher yields drove investors and speculators to developing countries, where the inflows increased leverage, propped up equity prices, and in some cases supported a commodity price boom.
Market capitalization in the Mumbai, Johannesburg, São Paulo, and Shanghai stock exchanges, for example, nearly tripled in the years following the financial crisis.
Equity markets in other developing countries also witnessed similar dramatic increases during this period.
But the capital flows are now reversing, turning negative for the first time since 2006, with net outflows from developing countries in 2015 exceeding $600 billion – more than one-quarter of the inflows they received during the previous six years.
The largest outflows have been through banking channels, with international banks reducing their gross credit exposures to developing countries by more than $800 billion in 2015.
Capital outflows of this magnitude are likely to have myriad effects: drying up liquidity, increasing the costs of borrowing and debt service, weakening currencies, depleting reserves, and leading to decreases in equity and other asset prices.
There will be large knock-on effects on the real economy, including severe damage to developing countries’ growth prospects.
This is not the first time that developing countries have faced the challenges of managing pro-cyclical hot capital, but the magnitudes this time are overwhelming.
During the Asian financial crisis, net outflows from the East Asian economies were only $12 billion in 1997.
Of course, the East Asian economies today are better able to withstand such massive outflows, given their accumulation of international reserves since the financial crisis in 1997.
Indeed, the global stock of reserves has more than tripled since the Asian financial crisis.
China, for example, used nearly $500 billion of its reserves in 2015 to fight capital outflows and prevent the renminbi’s sharp depreciation; but it still has more than $3 trillion in reserves.
The stockpile of reserves may partly explain why huge outflows have not triggered a full-blown financial crisis in developing countries.
Once again, advocates of free mobility for destabilizing short-term capital flows are being proven wrong.
South Korea, for example, has been using a series of macro-prudential measures since 2010, aimed at moderating pro-cyclical cross-border banking-sector liabilities.
Corporate sectors in developing countries, having increased their leverage with capital inflows during the post-2008 period, are particularly vulnerable.
Capital outflows will adversely affect their equity prices, push up their debt-to-equity ratios, and increase the likelihood of defaults.
The problem is especially severe in commodity-exporting developing economies, where firms borrowed extensively, expecting high commodity prices to persist.
Many developing-country governments failed to learn the lesson of earlier crises, which should have prompted regulations and taxes restricting and discouraging foreign-currency exposures.
Expedited debtor-friendly bankruptcy procedures could ensure quick restructuring and provide a framework for renegotiating debts.
Developing-country governments should also encourage the conversion of such debts to GDP-linked or other types of indexed bonds.
Those with high levels of foreign debt but with reserves should also consider buying back their sovereign debt in the international capital market, taking advantage of falling bond prices.
While reserves may provide some cushion for minimizing the adverse effects of capital outflows, in most cases they will not be sufficient.
Developing countries should resist the temptation of raising interest rates to stem capital outflows.
In fact, because they hurt economic growth, further reducing countries’ ability to service external debts, higher interest rates can be counterproductive.
Macro-prudential measures can discourage or delay capital outflows, but such measures, too, may be insufficient.
In some cases, it may be necessary to introduce selective, targeted, and time-bound capital controls to stem outflows, especially outflows through banking channels.
This would entail, for example, restricting capital transfers between parent banks in developed countries and their subsidiaries or branches in developing countries.
Following the successful Malaysian example in 1997, developing countries could also temporarily suspend all capital withdrawals to stabilize capital flows and exchange rates.
This is perhaps the only recourse for many developing countries to avoid a catastrophic financial crisis.
The views expressed here do not represent the views of the United Nations or its member states.
That is what the country’s president, Dilma Rousseff, keeps telling Brazilians.
With the economy nearly stagnant in 2011 and the first half of 2012, faster growth is a political necessity for her.
But her admonition also reflects a broader national preoccupation with economic might, befitting a vast country with continent-size aspirations.
That outlook sets Brazil apart in a region where politicians – from Argentina and Chile to Ecuador and Venezuela – often seem more concerned with handing out slices of natural-resource wealth than with creating new sources of prosperity.
To be sure, Brazil’s economic growth over the last decade owed much to the commodity boom that has also benefitted its South American neighbors.
In 2010, growth reached an impressive 7.5% clip, as highly expansionary fiscal and monetary policies, implemented in response to the global financial crisis, lifted the economy out of harm’s way.
Today, similar policies are again doing the trick, with GDP growth picking up in the second half of 2012 and expected to reach more than 4% in 2013.
But can Brazil move beyond these stop-and-go cycles and ensure steady growth?
One obvious constraint is a lack of investment in physical capital, as anyone who has used Brazil’s maddening airports and roads can attest.
Brazil wants to compete with Asian giants like China and India, but its investment rate, at just 19% of GDP, is decidedly un-Asian.
And, even at such a low level of investment, Brazil’s current-account deficit is more than 2% of GDP, exposing an alarming paucity of domestic savings.
With Brazil’s new middle class focused on the consumption patterns commensurate with its status, the additional savings must come from the public sector – a task that previous governments found politically unmanageable.
Now, however, the country’s improved macroeconomic picture is creating greater room for maneuver.
Brazil’s central bank has brought interest rates to record lows, and has vowed to keep them there for a long time.
Ilan Goldfajn, the chief economist at Itaú Unibanco, estimates that a sustained drop of one percentage point in the short-term interest rate saves the government the equivalent of 0.5% of GDP.
The political challenge for Rousseff’s administration is to channel those savings to new public investment or to tax incentives for private investment, rather than adding to current expenditures.
That is why she adopted a hard line in a recent protracted wage dispute with public-sector workers – in which she ultimately prevailed, despite opposition within her own party.
But even if new financing for investment can be found, it remains unclear which samba troupes can lead Brazil’s economic carnival in the future.
Brazil has spawned some world-class companies – for example, aircraft manufacturer Embraer – but most industrial sectors remain focused on the internal market and are not internationally competitive.
The government has recently used its regulatory power to push down rates for both households and firms.
But, in the long term, Brazil will have to invest more in generation – and those investments, as every government in Latin America knows, are increasingly controversial for political and environmental reasons.
Brazil has quietly dropped its decade-long commitment to floating its currency, and has moved to a de facto semi-fixed regime, with the exchange rate allowed to move only within a narrow band slightly above two reals to the US dollar.
Brazilian authorities have tried to fix the exchange rate before, but these attempts tended to be short-lived, because the financial costs of sterilizing the central bank’s currency-market interventions are too high.
Intervention costs have been limited so far, owing to uncertainty in Europe, capital controls, and lower interest rates at home.
But another wave of global liquidity, prompted perhaps by a third round of quantitative easing in the United States, could upset this delicate equilibrium.
The Rousseff administration is also creating incentives (subsidies, directed credit, and even some new import tariffs) aimed at developing certain sectors.
Enthusiasts describe it as a new brand of modern industrial policy that can help to push Brazil beyond its traditional role as a commodity exporter.
Critics call it a misguided effort that will only create more distortions and retard growth.
In my view, the intellectual case for activist policies – as made, for example, by Dani Rodrik and Ricardo Hausmann of Harvard – is strong.
Markets for innovation and new ideas work poorly and governments can help to address those market failures.
But Rodrik and Hausmann also show that getting such policies right implies exacting requirements.
Countries must create institutions to ensure that support is given – and withdrawn – only with expected productivity in mind, not as a way to reward friends or political allies.
If Brazil can get it right, it would rival a victory in the 2014 World Cup for the country’s football team as a badge of national pride.
TEL AVIV – President Barack Obama’s vision of a world without nuclear weapons, and the recent agreement he signed with Russia aimed at cutting back the nuclear stockpiles of both countries, enhances his moral and political leadership.
But how will his campaign against nuclear proliferation affect Israel, widely seen as the world’s sixth nuclear weapon state, and so far the only one in the Middle East?
US Assistant Secretary of State Rose Gottemoeller’s recent call for Israel to join the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), which would require it to declare and relinquish its nuclear arsenal, has incited fears that America’s diplomatic umbrella for Israel’s nuclear status is ending.
From now on, it appeared to Israelis, the US will treat all states the same when it comes to nuclear weapons.
Israel is especially concerned that Obama might be willing to address Iran’s nuclear ambition by equating it with Israel’s nuclear status.
The intellectual foundations of the new American attitude were laid down in a famous article by Henry Kissinger, Sam Nunn, George Schultz, and William Perry entitled “Toward a Nuclear-Free World.”
In calling upon the world’s nuclear powers to preach by example and dramatically reduce their nuclear arsenals, the article was also a call for equality among nations in the nuclear domain.
Bruce Riedel, who until recently headed the Obama administration’s strategy review for Afghanistan and Pakistan, and who is by no means hostile to America’s unique relations with Israel, has been explicit about this.
“If you are really serious about a deal with Iran, Israel has to come out of the closet.
A policy based on fiction and double standards is bound to fail sooner or later.
But it was a recent statement to Congress by Secretary of Defense Robert Gates that was especially shocking to Israelis.
He expressed understanding for Iran’s desire to acquire nuclear weapons because, as he said, the Iranians are surrounded by nuclear powers such as Pakistan, India, Russia, and Israel.
Israel is bound to fight against this emerging new American doctrine that equates it with Iran, or even with India and Pakistan for that matter.
Not only has Iran developed its nuclear capabilities while a party to the NPT, the Israelis will say, but it also has put Israel’s destruction high on its agenda.
Across-the-board nuclear equality can, in the end, only boost to Iran’s nuclear claims.
India and Pakistan, unlike Israel, which has been committed to a strategy of nuclear opacity, both see themselves as nuclear states and want the world to accept that status.
Moreover, Israel never tested a nuclear weapon, and has unequivocally accepted the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) guidelines, which seek to stem proliferation through the control of nuclear exports.
Israel expects the Obama administration not only to appreciate the unique context of its ambiguous nuclear status, but also to recognize that it cannot be forthcoming in assuring its neighbors or the rest of the world regarding its nuclear program unless the Middle East political environment changes in a radically positive way.
Here, a change in Iran’s pattern of behavior toward Israel is an absolute prerequisite.
The potential for export of nuclear material and know-how by countries such as Pakistan – and perhaps one day Iran – is also a matter of concern for Israel.
Indeed, Israel insists that it is, after all, Iran, not Israel’s supposed nuclear capabilities, that triggered the current Middle East nuclear arms race.
But, as with the issue of the West Bank settlements, the Obama administration seems to be moving definitively away from an automatic endorsement of Israel’s understandings with previous US administrations.
A revision of US policy towards Israel’s nuclear status can by no means be ruled out.
Gottemoeller’s declaration, as well as Gates’ explicit recognition of Israel’s nuclear status should be interpreted within the context of the Obama administration’s broader disarmament agenda.
Israel’s policy of nuclear ambiguity has remained practically unchallenged for almost 50 years, not least within Israel itself, where the issue has been a sacred taboo.
But the changing international environment, the threat of uncontrolled nuclear proliferation in the Middle East, and the new policies being worked out in the US might all be good reasons for Israel to consider revising its nuclear doctrine.
After all, the current strategy has not really worked either as a deterrent against conventional attacks (which persisted throughout the years that Israel supposedly developed its nuclear arsenal) or as a warning to rivals (such as Iran) against developing a nuclear weapon.
Israel’s official policy is that of a Middle East Free of Weapons of Mass Destruction.
By abandoning ambiguity and taking its own bomb out of the “basement,” Israel might be able to affirm its capacity for nuclear deterrence more convincingly, and, more importantly, enhance a serious debate about the urgency of a nuclear-free zone in the Middle East.
MEXICO CITY – Shortly before America’s elections last November, then vice-presidential candidate Joseph Biden was widely criticized for predicting that an Obama administration would almost certainly be tested by what he called a “generated” international crisis, in much the way that the Soviet Union “tested” John F. Kennedy shortly after he assumed office.
Biden did not point to a specific region of the world, but mentioned the Middle East, the Indian sub-continent, and Russia as the likeliest sources of trouble for the new president.
Impolitic or not, Biden’s anxieties seem to have informed several of the administration’s early foreign policy decisions.
These include Biden’s own extension of an olive branch to Russia at the recent Munich Security Conference, and Barack Obama’s appointment of Richard Holbrooke as special envoy for Pakistan and Afghanistan and of George Mitchell to a similar post for Israel-Palestine.
But, as pressing as the Middle East, south Asia, and Russia (as well as Iran and North Korea) are, another crisis far closer to home could create as much peril as a nuclear-armed Iran, an aggressively resurgent Russia, or even an Islamist-dominated Pakistan.
That crisis is located in Mexico, which is in freefall, its state institutions under threat as they have not been since at least the Cristero Uprising of the late 1920’s and possibly since the Mexican Revolution of 1910.
While the Obama administration is obviously aware of what is happening south of the Rio Grande, the threat simply does not command the attention that its gravity requires.
The crisis consists in nothing less than an effort by the major drug cartels to tame and suborn the Mexican state, and not just in the strip along the United States border, though the epicenter of the crisis is there.
Obviously, the cartels’ leaders do not have designs on Mexico’s presidential palace.
But, through a policy of terror extending from Oaxaca in the south, through Acapulco on the Pacific coast, and up to the great border cities of Tijuana and Juarez (Mexico’s sixth and seventh most populous cities, respectively), they have made it abundantly clear that they are trying to achieve impunity.
The only recent parallel in Latin America was a similar effort fifteen years ago by the Colombian drug cartels.
That disguised coup failed – barely – and there is no guarantee that the result will be similar this time around in Mexico.
Journalists with long experience of war zones report being more worried about their safety in Mexico border than when they were in Bosnia, Afghanistan, or Iraq, though much of the violence is internecine.
Of the thousands who have been killed, often after being horribly tortured, many, if not most, have been members of the drug cartels and their families.
But it is the campaign of targeted assassination against any Mexican official who seems to pose a serious threat to the cartels’ operations that makes the crisis so dire.
First, in May 2007, the cartels killed Jose Nemesio Lugo Felix, the general coordinator of information at the National Center for Planning and Analysis to Combat Organized Crime.
Soon after, a hit man murdered Edgar Milan Gomez, Mexico’s highest-ranking Federal police official.
In November, 2008, a plane carrying Juan Camilo Mourino, Mexico’s national security advisor, crashed under mysterious circumstances.
And very recently, retired General Mauro Enrique Tello Quinones, one of the most decorated officers in the Mexican army, was abducted, tortured, and killed less than a week after assuming a new position as anti-drug chief in the resort city of Cancun.
For all the lip service paid to relations with Mexico (and, indeed, with Latin America more generally) from Franklin D. Roosevelt to Obama, the truth is that developments in Mexico have always gotten short shrift from US presidents.
Illegal immigration is a major issue, to be sure, as is the drug trade.
But the US government has always regarded them as domestic American issues rather than as key foreign-policy concerns.
It is emblematic that while Obama has received Mexican President Felipe Calderón, the White House only recently announced that one of his first foreign trips would be to Mexico.
And incoming Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was asked almost nothing about Mexico at her confirmation hearing, and she emphasized relations with Mexico neither in her own statement nor in those she has made since assuming her post.
Indeed, the conventional wisdom in the US is that Mexico policy regarding illegal immigration and drugs will be the province of the new Homeland Security secretary, Janet Napolitano (herself a former border state governor).
Meanwhile, the Treasury and Commerce departments will be handle trade policy concerning the North American Free Trade Agreement.
And, offensive as this has been to Mexican sensibilities – and harmful to finding long-term solutions to America’s immigration dilemma –these complacent arrangements have never presented so clear and present danger as they do today.
The shape it takes five years from now will be decided in the coming 3-5 months.
But now it has to deal with two sources of existential crisis: Greece and Ukraine.
Greece’s long-festering crisis has been mishandled by all parties from the outset.
Emotions now are running so high that muddling through is the only constructive alternative.
Vladimir Putin’s Russia is the aggressor, and Ukraine, in defending itself, is defending the values and principles on which the EU was built.
Putin is gaining ground in Ukraine, and Europe is so preoccupied with Greece that it hardly pays any attention.
Putin’s preferred outcome in Ukraine is to engineer a financial and political collapse that destabilizes the country, and for which he can disclaim responsibility, rather than a military victory that leaves him in possession of – and responsible for – part of Ukraine.
The deterioration in Ukraine’s position between the two ceasefire agreements – Minsk I, negotiated last September, and Minsk II, completed in February – shows the extent of Putin’s success.
But that success is temporary, and Ukraine is too valuable an ally for the EU to abandon.
How else could Putin’s Russia have outmaneuvered Ukraine’s allies, which used to lead the free world?
The trouble is that Europe has been drip-feeding Ukraine, just as it has Greece.
As a result, Ukraine barely survives, while Putin has the first-mover advantage.
He can choose between hybrid war and hybrid peace, and Ukraine and its allies are struggling to respond.
The financial collapse of which I had been warning for months occurred in February, when the hryvnia’s value plummeted 50% in a few days, and the National Bank of Ukraine had to inject large amounts of money to rescue the banking system.
The climax was reached on February 25, when the central bank introduced import controls and raised interest rates to 30%.
Since then, President Petro Poroshenko’s jawboning has brought the exchange rate back close to the level on which Ukraine’s 2015 budget was based.
This temporary collapse has shaken public confidence and endangered the balance sheets of Ukrainian banks and companies that have hard-currency debts.
It has also undermined the calculations on which Ukraine’s programs with the International Monetary Fund are based.
But EU member states, facing their own fiscal constraints, have shown no willingness to consider additional bilateral aid.
At the same time, a radical reform program within Ukraine is gaining momentum, and slowly becoming visible to both the Ukrainian public and the European authorities.
There is a stark contrast between the deteriorating external situation and the continuing progress in internal reforms.
One plausible scenario is that Putin achieves his optimal objective and Ukraine’s resistance crumbles.
Europe would be flooded with refugees – two million seems to be a realistic estimate.
The likelier outcome is that a victorious Putin would have many friends in Europe, and that the sanctions on Russia would be allowed to lapse.
That is the worst possible outcome for Europe, which would become even more divided, turning into a battleground for influence between Putin’s Russia and the United States.
The EU would cease to be a functioning political force in the world (especially if Greece also left the eurozone).
A more likely scenario is that Europe muddles through by drip-feeding Ukraine.
Ukraine does not collapse, but the oligarchs reassert themselves and the new Ukraine begins to resemble the old Ukraine.
But his victory would be less secure, as it would lead to a second Cold War that Russia would lose, just as the Soviet Union lost the first.
Putin’s Russia needs oil at $100 a barrel and will start running out of currency reserves in 2-3 years.
The latest chapter in what I call the “Tragedy of the European Union” is that the EU will lose the new Ukraine.
The principles that Ukraine is defending – the very principles on which the EU is based – will be abandoned, and the EU will have to spend a lot more money on defending itself than it would need to spend helping the new Ukraine succeed.
Though Ukraine, on its own, is no match for Russia’s military might, its allies could decide to do “whatever it takes” to help, short of becoming involved in a direct military confrontation with Russia or violating the Minsk agreement.
Doing so would not only help Ukraine; it would also help the EU to recapture the values and principles that it seems to have lost.
The suspicion that politicians are inclined to tell lies is as old as politics itself.
Yet when a politician is caught in a lie, the consequences are often dire, at least in democratic countries.
Indeed, proving that a politician is a liar is just about the only way to get rid of him or her quickly and terminally, which is why the attempt is so attractive to political opponents.
Few cases are as clear-cut as that of Anneli Jaatteenmaki, whose short-lived stint as Finland's first woman prime minister recently came to an end.
She had attacked her predecessor during the election campaign for being fork-tongued about Iraq, saying one thing to US President George W. Bush and another to the Finnish people.
When the opposite was proven and a secret document was found in her possession, she had to go.
Another campaigner under investigation by his parliament for being ``economical with the truth'' is German Chancellor Gerhard Schröder.
The opposition, still smarting from its narrow defeat in last autumn's election, accuses him of not having told the truth about Germany's weak economy and the consequences for the national budget.
Almost a year after the election, a parliamentary committee of inquiry is still interviewing ``witnesses.''
At most, deputies will be able to offer the public a fresh example of a favorite trick in politics: to tell the truth was told and nothing but the truth, but not exactly the whole truth.
In fact, the charges of lying concern only Blair, for Bush has (so far) been absolved of all possible sins in view of the apparent success of the Iraq campaign.
But Blair is under heavy fire from his parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee for having overstated the threat posed by Saddam Hussein.
Intelligence dossiers (it is claimed) were ``sexed up'' by Blair's underlings.
More particularly, there was no evidence for the prime minister's claim that the Iraqi dictator could have launched ``WMD's'', as weapons of mass destruction are now called, ``within 45 minutes''.
Don't we know from past evidence that Saddam Hussein was prepared to develop WMD's and to use them if the occasion presented itself?
In the middle of his second term, Tony Blair is going through a bad patch.
Opponents within his own party are increasingly replacing the ineffectual Tory opposition.
Blair is much more vulnerable than he was a year ago, and he must tread softly if he does not want to lose further support.
WMD's in Saddam's possession were but one in a sequence of arguments.
There was also, at least in the US, the desire to avenge the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, as well as geopolitical interests.
Tony Blair also expressed moral outrage at the way the Iraqi dictator had behaved toward his own people in making the case for regime change.
Supporters of the war--often reluctant in any case--had picked up one or the other of these arguments, and if they focused on WMD's, they now feel betrayed.
The two cabinet ministers who resigned over the affair, Robin Cook and Clare Short, want their own revenge and thus continue to attack Blair for his ``lies.''
Indeed, he has gone on the counter-attack, notably against the BBC, which had not exactly supported the war with enthusiasm.
But does the uncertainty now circling Blair like a vulture now smell the appetizingly foul scent of a lie?
Or is it more a question of a prime minister losing the trust of his people, including some his erstwhile friends and allies?
Blair has used the ``Trust me!'' pose often, not least in the case of the war in Iraq.
In any case, one does not have to be found out as a liar to lose such trust.
Indeed, a politician's reputation can be damaged even if no one doubts the truthfulness of his statements.
It suffices if people feel that he is trying to mislead them, or even that he has not got things clear in his own mind.
A leader can tell the truth, nothing but the truth, but less than the whole truth and yet still be trusted.
Once a politician has lost trust however, people will no longer believe him even if he tells the truth.
WASHINGTON, DC – The debate over access to affordable medicines in emerging and developing countries frequently overlooks a critical issue: Governments in these countries routinely slap tariffs and other taxes on vitally important drugs.
While these measures tend to be modest revenue generators, they make the affected medicines more expensive, which can put them out of reach for many who need them most.
Like developed countries, emerging and developing countries import some – if not all – of their medicines, the cost of which is mainly covered by the patients themselves, given these countries’ lack of health insurance.
Indians, for example, pay 70% of their health-care expenses out of their own pockets.
With tariffs and other taxes increasing drug costs by as much as two-thirds in some areas, even the most basic generic drugs become unaffordable for the poorest people.
As one research report on Delhi’s medicine market concluded, such levies are essentially a “tax on the sick” which the government could easily remove.
According to a 2012 study by the World Trade Organization, Argentina, Brazil, India, and Russia impose tariffs of around 10% on imported medicines, while Algeria and Rwanda, for example, maintain a 15% rate.
As the report noted, it is difficult to understand why small countries maintain high tariffs on health products – a move that serves only to drive up domestic prices.
Brazil imposes a 28% rate on prescription medicines, while medicines in India are subject to 5% value-added tax and a 3% education tax, on top of state taxes that range from 5% to 16%.
But, in 2011, India raised more in drug taxes than the government spent on medicines for the public.
India’s health-care crisis might ease if the government stopped artificially hiking the prices of medicines that people need.
Moreover, fiscal pressures notwithstanding, it seems highly regressive, if not downright perverse, to place the greatest financial burden on those in the poorest health (and who presumably are the target of such social programs).
Raising medicine prices reduces usage, leading to more illness, lower productivity, and slower GDP growth.
Several countries, including Colombia, Ethiopia, Malaysia, Nicaragua, Pakistan, Tanzania, and Uganda, have substantially reduced or eliminated tariffs and taxes on medicines.
After Kenya removed tariffs and taxes on anti-malaria products, for example, it reported a 44% decline in infant mortality and disease between 2002 and 2009.
India and China, as major pharmaceutical exporters themselves, have a clear interest in seeing lower medicine tariffs worldwide.
India, hailed as “the pharmacy to the developing world,” is one of the largest exporters of finished drugs, while China produces 70-80% of these drugs’ active ingredients.
Abolishing pharmaceutical tariffs would follow the example set by developed countries when they created the WTO two decades ago.
As the World Health Organization declared: “governments should tax the things which make people ill, not the things which make them well.”
To be sure, tax cuts would not address all of the many challenges surrounding access to healthcare in emerging and developing countries, such as the lack of hospitals, clinics, doctors, and public and private insurance.
But removing tariffs is something that could be implemented quickly and that would benefit the neediest people immediately.
As home to leading drug producers – and many of those most affected by these taxes – India and China should lead an international liberalization effort.
The BRICS Summit, to be held on July 15-17 in Fortaleza, Brazil, might be a good place to start.
Earlier this year, China joined 13 other WTO members calling for tariffs on environmental goods to be removed.
China, India, and the other BRICS should form a similar coalition to press for the elimination of pharmaceutical tariffs, thereby broadening access to health care throughout the developing world.
CAMBRIDGE – Of the 24 teams that qualified for this year’s UEFA European Cup football (soccer) tournament, only one came from Germany.
After all, East and West Germans reunited only in 1991, and Bavarians united with Prussians only in 1871, whereas the annexations/unions of Ireland, Wales, and Scotland to the Kingdom of England go back to 1177, 1542, and 1707, respectively.
So why do Thuringians, Saxons, and Swabians root for the same German team, while UK citizens root for so many?
(Scotland and even Gibraltar have their own teams as well.)
Wouldn’t they have a stronger team if they chose the best players to represent them all?
Presumably, British citizens understand this, but they prefer to have their own national teams rather than a stronger UK team – even if this means losing to tiny Iceland.
After all, if it is only about the strongest team, you might as well root for Barcelona.
The “Remain” campaign focused on the economic benefits of staying in the European Union and the costs of leaving, some of which fell due immediately after the results were announced: the British pound plummeted and stock markets wiped out a couple of trillion dollars of wealth.
And yet 52% of those who voted preferred a country where Poles and Romanians would not be permitted to live, work, and compete for a position on the economic team.
Letting them in might produce a better team, but it would no longer be our team.
But our emotions are the algorithms, bequeathed by evolution, by which we make most decisions, including political ones; economic cost-benefit analysis that does not connect to our emotional compass does not move the needle.
What does it mean to be a member of the EU, Nigeria, Iraq, Turkey, Switzerland, or any other political entity?
The sense of us is a subroutine of the brain based on the sense of self, which is one of our brain’s many creations: a sensation of being an ongoing entity that experiences things, remembers its history, can act, and has feelings and goals – what the eminent neuroscientist Antonio Damasio calls an autobiographical self.
Our brain is also acutely aware of the existence of other selves, with their feelings and intentions, and it is particularly good at reading what others are thinking, feeling, and planning.
We use this same mental apparatus to develop a sense of “us”: the people we care about and root for.
We think of this “us” as if it were a person with an autobiography, a temperament, predispositions, and aspirations.
We regard firms as legal persons, and we talk about countries as if they were a composite person with clear characteristics: Germans love order, Italians are passionate, and Brits possess a stiff upper lip.
And, obviously, the sense of “us” implies a sense of “them”: those whose welfare we consider less fundamental than our own.
As Joshua Greene, Director of Harvard University’s Moral Cognition Lab, has argued, our moral sentiments evolved to support human cooperation.
Just as evolution gave us sexual desire, rather than rational arguments, to ensure procreation, so we have evolved feelings of empathy, affection, disgust, and rage to respond to one another’s behavior.
Our moral sentiments both limit individuals’ abuse of the common good, expressed in the conflict between “me” and “us,” and maintain the coherence of the group, to support the competition between “us” and “them.”
Technological and cultural development has required an ever-expanding sense of “us.”
Over the past 10,000 years, as we moved from small hunter-gatherer bands to agricultural settlements, urbanization, and beyond, the network of people with whom we must interact and cooperate expanded, from small bands to nations-states and eventually to an entity like the EU.
When humans lived from subsistence agriculture, their radius of interaction was small: they did not have to talk to one another, and as a consequence, languages diverged.
That is why Cameroon, a country slightly smaller than Spain, is home to 230 languages.
By contrast, when the Industrial Revolution increased the value of larger markets, Italy (1861-1871) and Germany (1870-1871) were created by unifying smaller states on the basis of nationalist sentiment and a common language, both of which actually had to be created.
Without it, on whose behalf would the state – which is supposed to make decisions, define and protect rights, and impose obligations – be acting?
If “us” includes only, say, the Alawites in Syria, the Kikuyu in Kenya, or Han Chinese in China, everyone else has an incentive to rebel.
Clearly, countries that have a shared language and religion may develop a sense of “us” more easily than others.
But the world is full of states that are very diverse in these two dimensions, in which an alternative sense of “us” evolves and is constantly redefined by politics.
In the United States, for example, the sense of “us” initially included only white Anglo-Saxon Protestants, not Irish, Italian, or Polish Catholics or Jews – and especially not African-Americans.
Largely through politics, a more inclusive sense of “us” developed.
In the absence of a common language and religion, the EU’s sense of “us” must be based on shared values and culture, born of centuries of interaction.
And what a heritage it is: the Renaissance, the Enlightenment, several industrial revolutions, fantastic science, art, and most sports.
One wonders why euro bills are adorned with indistinct motifs, rather than with figures of universal appeal – da Vinci, Newton, Voltaire, Rembrandt, Cervantes, Chopin, or Beethoven – who best represent Europe’s cultural patrimony.
The European project will succeed only when it creates a European sense of “us” so powerful that it feels right that, say, Bulgarians should be permitted to live and work in Birmingham.
Elections are managed with biometrics, forests are monitored by satellite imagery, banking has migrated from branch offices to smartphones, and medical x-rays are examined halfway around the world.
With a bit of investment and foresight, spelled out in a new report, prepared by the UN Sustainable Development Solutions Network (SDSN), on Data for Development, the data revolution can drive a sustainable development revolution, and accelerate progress toward ending poverty, promoting social inclusion, and protecting the environment.
The world’s governments will adopt the new Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) at a special United Nations summit on September 25.
The occasion will likely be the largest gathering of world leaders in history, as some 170 heads of state and government adopt shared goals that will guide global development efforts until 2030.
So we will need new tools, including new data systems, to turn the SDGs into reality by 2030.
In developing these new data systems, governments, businesses, and civil-society groups should promote four distinct purposes.
The data revolution gives governments and businesses new and greatly improved ways to deliver services, fight corruption, cut red tape, and guarantee access in previously isolated places.
Information technology is already revolutionizing the delivery of health care, education, governance, infrastructure (for example, prepaid electricity), banking, emergency response, and much more.
Officials can now maintain real-time dashboards informing them of the current state of government facilities, transport networks, emergency relief operations, public health surveillance, violent crimes, and much more.
Citizen feedback can also improve functioning, such as by crowd-sourcing traffic information from drivers.
Geographic information systems (GIS) allow for real-time monitoring across local governments and districts in far-flung regions.
It is a truism that government bureaucracies cut corners, hide gaps in service delivery, exaggerate performance, or, in the worst cases, simply steal when they can get away with it.
The data revolution can help to ensure that verifiable data are accessible to the general public and the intended recipients of public and private services.
When services do not arrive on schedule (owing to, say, a bottleneck in construction or corruption in the supply chain), the data system will enable the public to pinpoint problems and hold governments and businesses to account.
Finally, the data revolution should enable the public to know whether or not a global goal or target has actually been achieved.
The Millennium Development Goals, which were set in the year 2000, established quantitative targets for the year 2015.
But, although we are now in the MDGs’ final year, we still lack precise knowledge of whether certain MDG targets have been achieved, owing to the absence of high-quality, timely data.
Some of the most important MDG targets are reported with a lag of several years.
The World Bank, for example, has not published detailed poverty data since 2010.
The data revolution can end the long lags and dramatically improve the quality of the data.
For example, rather than relying on household surveys every few years to calculate the mortality rate, systems of civil registration and vital statistics can collect mortality data in real time, with the added benefit of information on cause of death.
Likewise, poverty data could be collected at relatively low cost and with much higher frequency than today, by using smart phones to replace paper-based surveys.
Some analysts have suggested that the use of mobile phones could bring down the cost of surveys by up to 60% in some East African countries over a ten-year period.
Private companies, such as Gallup International, could work alongside the more traditional public-sector statistical offices to accelerate data collection.
The data revolution offers a breakthrough opportunity for service delivery, management, accountability, and validation, thanks to a dense ecosystem of technologies that collect information in multiple ways: remote sensing and satellite imagery, biometric data, GIS tracking, facilities-based data, household surveys, social media, crowd-sourcing, and other channels.
To support the SDGs, such data should be publicly available for all countries at high frequency – at least within one year for key targets, and in real time in sectors where service delivery is vital (health, education, and the like).
Private companies, including telecoms, social marketing companies, systems designers, survey firms, and other information providers, should all be integrated into the data “ecosystem.”
In preparing the new report, the SDSN teamed up with several partner agencies to prepare a “needs assessment” on how to launch the data revolution for the SDGs.
The report offers an action plan that builds on partnerships between national statistical systems and private information firms and other non-governmental data providers.
As the report emphasizes, low-income and lower-middle-income countries will need financial help to create these new data systems.
While the cost estimates are necessarily provisional, especially in this era of disruptive technological change, the new study suggests that proper data systems for the SDGs will require at least $1 billion per year to cover all of the 77 lower-income countries.
Of that sum, around half should be financed through official development assistance, which implies an increment of at least $200 million per year above current donor flows.
In July, the world will assemble in Addis Ababa for the International Finance for Development Conference, and just weeks after that, at UN Headquarters to adopt the SDGs in late September.
With quick action before these two summit meetings, the world will be ready to launch the SDGs with the data systems that they need to succeed.
PARIS – In an ambitious, visionary speech at the Sorbonne this week, French President Emmanuel Macron presented his plan for countering the tide of xenophobic nationalism in Europe.
He wants to build a “sovereign, united, and democratic Europe,” where citizens again feel a sense of allegiance to the idea of Europe itself.
Macron’s speech was a welcome call to arms for a European Union that is confronting many crises and threats.
But on the crucial and controversial question of fixing the eurozone, his proposals were disappointing.
And he will have a hard time winning over his more cautious European counterparts, not least German Chancellor Angela Merkel, whose room for maneuver was crimped by her party’s poor showing in last weekend’s federal election.
That EU embraces globalization and innovation, while also protecting Europeans, doing more to help them adapt to a changing world.
It advances European interests and values in a world otherwise dominated by America and China.
And it bolsters security at a time of increasing Russian revanchism, Islamist terrorism, and American disengagement under President Donald Trump.
Macron combined big ideas with many concrete proposals for closer cooperation on defense, migration, the environment, innovation, education, and much else.
Macron mused that, if he succeeds, a “Brexiting” Britain “may one day find its place again” in an overhauled EU, along with new members from the Western Balkans.
Under Macron’s plan, each EU member state would hold democratic conventions to debate citizens’ priorities.
Their ideas would feed into a broader process involving the EU institutions and governments that want to overhaul Europe.
Coalitions of willing governments would then integrate faster, with a revitalized Franco-German engine driving the process forward.
Europe could very well succumb to nationalism if Macron’s plan fails.
That would be devastating for Germany, a country whose economic success, political identity, and security are based on a strong, functioning EU.
Macron is the most pro-German French president imaginable, and he has boosted his credibility by pursuing difficult labor-market reforms and unveiling a Teutonically prudent budget.
Germany would be committing a monumental strategic blunder if it did not engage seriously with his proposals.
Macron had timed his speech to influence the post-election coalition negotiations there, with the hope that Merkel would use her fourth and likely final term to burnish her legacy by enacting bold European reforms.
Macron was also counting on Merkel’s Christian Democratic Union (CDU) to maintain its grand coalition with the Social Democrats (SPD) and their leader, former European Parliament President Martin Schulz.
The CDU and its Bavarian sister party, the Christian Social Union (CSU), lost support, and the SPD fared so poorly that it has decided to return to the opposition.
At the same time, the far-right, anti-EU Alternative for Germany (AfD) stormed into the Bundestag with 13% of the vote, and has pledged to “hunt” Merkel down.
Merkel, now politically weakened, must try to cobble together an unruly coalition that includes both the Europhile Greens, who welcomed Macron’s speech, and the Euroskeptic Free Democrats (FDP), who were hostile to it.
And while the AfD attacks her right flank, rivals within her own party will be jostling to succeed her.
Macron’s eurozone-reform plans will be the biggest bone of contention.
He wants to create a eurozone budget, funded by corporate-tax revenues.
The joint budget, which would make investments and provide a cushion during economic downturns, would be overseen by a eurozone finance minister, who would answer to eurozone countries’ representatives in the European Parliament.
But Germany is skeptical of what it sees as a “transfer union,” in which its taxpayers would hand over cash to profligate countries that have failed to remodel their economies along German lines.
Merkel would prefer a small common fund to help member-state governments enact difficult reforms, not a Keynesian fiscal stabilizer.
And while Macron envisions a finance minister who would be a political counterpart to European Central Bank President Mario Draghi, Merkel would prefer that the role be limited to enforcing national fiscal discipline.
The danger now is that Macron will achieve only a token eurozone budget in exchange for even tighter controls on national budgets, which would prove economically harmful and politically poisonous.
He would also miss his chance to enact the reforms that the eurozone actually needs.
These include deeper financial-market integration; an easier process for writing down bank and government debts; greater fiscal flexibility; and more balanced economic-adjustment mechanisms.
Macron’s most promising idea is to “give Europe back to its citizens.”
In my book European Spring, I argue that a flawed, technocratic EU needs bold leaders, political entrepreneurs, grassroots movements, and more experiments with deliberative democracy to deliver change.
Macron is right to point out that the EU bureaucracy often seems remote, uninspiring, and ineffectual; but he also rightly rejects referenda that polarize citizens over simplistic binary choices.
The big, open democratic conventions that he has proposed for the first half of 2018 could inject fresh ideas into a stale debate, provide legitimacy for bold reforms, and put pressure on recalcitrant governments.
Conventions could also foster new political movements like Macron’s own La République En Marche !, which could bring fresh faces into politics, help to open up closed, corrupt party systems, and start to rebuild the public’s trust in politicians.
They could also give Macron more leverage to push through his reforms, by running candidates in national and EU-wide elections.
Macron may be trying to achieve too much at once, but a more democratic, dynamic, and united EU is a prize worth fighting for.
NEWPORT BEACH – What is the most urgent economic priority shared by countries as diverse as Brazil, China, Cyprus, France, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Korea, Portugal, the United Kingdom, and the United States?
It is not debt and deficits; and it is not dealing with the aftermath of irresponsible lending and borrowing.
But the number one challenge facing these countries is to develop growth models that can provide more ample, well-paid, and secure jobs amid a secular re-alignment of the global economy.
For both theoretical and practical reasons, this is a challenge that will not be met easily or quickly.
And, when it is met, the process will most likely be partial and uneven, accentuating differences and posing tricky coordination issues at the national, regional, and global levels.
The last few years have highlighted the declining potency of long-standing growth models.
Some countries (for example, Greece and Portugal) relied on debt-financed government spending to fuel economy activity.
Others (think Cyprus, Iceland, Ireland, the UK, and the US) resorted to unsustainable surges in leverage among financial institutions to fund private-sector activities, sometimes almost irrespective of underlying fundamentals.
Still others (China and Korea) exploited seemingly limitless globalization and buoyant international trade to capture growing market shares.
Recent data from the International Monetary Fund highlight these models’ simultaneous loss of effectiveness.
Global growth averaged only 2.9% in the most recent five-year period, well below the level for virtually any such multi-year period going back to 1971.
Growth has been virtually flat in developed economies and, at 5.6% in the emerging world, is well below the 7.6% average in the previous five-year period.
Highly leveraged systems in finance-dependent economies were the first to hit a wall, surprising many who had uncritically bought into the “Great Moderation” – the idea that macroeconomic and asset-market volatility had eased permanently.
The bold policy action that countered the initial disorder prevented a global depression, but it encumbered public-sector balance sheets.
Some were pushed there by the high cost of containing the damage from banks’ irresponsible behavior.
Facing immediate credit rationing and large output contractions, they could be stabilized only by exceptional official financing from abroad, and, in some extreme cases, by defaulting on past commitments (including to bondholders and, most recently, bank depositors).
For other countries, including the US, medium-term issues came to the fore.
But, rather than catalyzing sensible policy discussions, these issues played into polarized and polarizing politics, creating new and more immediate headwinds to economic growth.
Meanwhile, a highly interdependent and (now) less dynamic world economy has been limiting the scope for external growth drivers.
Accordingly, even countries with sound balance sheets and manageable leverage have experienced a growth slowdown.
Alarmingly high youth unemployment, shrinking social safety nets, and under-investment in infrastructure and human capital are burdening current generations and, in a growing number of cases, will adversely affect future generations as well.
And yet, despite the urgent need for major policy adaptations at the national level, and much better regional and global coordination, progress has been disappointing.
With the political context undermining the right mix of short- and longer-term measures, national policymaking has stumbled into partial approaches and unusual experimentation.
The focus has been on buying time, rather than on implementing a sensible transition to a sustainable policy stance.
And potential national outcomes would be less uncertain if excessive inequality were not treated as an afterthought.
The absence of well-articulated common analyses and policy coordination has accentuated legitimacy deficits, encouraging leaders and publics to opt for partial narratives and eroding confidence in existing institutional structures.
Given these trends, the search for more robust growth models will take much longer and be more complicated than many recognize – especially as the world economy pivots away from unfettered globalization and high levels of leverage.
We should expect countries like the US to benefit from dynamic bottom-up entrepreneurship and traditional cyclical economic healing.
Notwithstanding a dysfunctional Congress, the private sector will increasingly convert a paralyzing uncertainty premium, which impedes much investment, into a less disruptive risk premium.
But, without a short-term economic turbo-charger, the recovery in growth and jobs will remain gradual, vulnerable to political and policy risks, and disproportionately beneficial to those with favorable initial endowments of wealth and globalized talents.
Governments’ role will be different in countries like China, where officials will guide a shift from dependence on external sources of growth to more balanced demand.
As this requires some fundamental domestic re-alignments, the rebalancing will be both gradual and non-linear at times.
Undermined by a lack of policy flexibility, it will take a long time for countries like Cyprus to overcome the immediate shock of crisis and revamp their growth models.
Left to their own devices, these multi-speed dynamics would translate into higher global growth overall, coupled with larger internal and cross-country disparities – often exacerbated by demographics.
The question is whether existing governance systems can coordinate effective intervention to counter the resulting tensions.
Parliaments and multilateral institutions must do a better job at facilitating cooperative policy implementation, which will require a willingness to reform outmoded institutions, including political lobbying.
The stronger sectors (within countries and across them) will continue to recover, but not enough to pull up the global economy whole As a result, weaker sectors risk being surpassed at an ever-faster pace.
These trends will become more difficult to reconcile and keep orderly if governance systems fail to adjust.
With one-third of the Palestinians’ Hamas-led government now under arrest by Israel, the escalation in Israeli-Palestinian relations has moved beyond military confrontation.
A far more fundamental question has come into view: can a Palestinian government that draws its authority from an agreement with Israel stay in power when it is led by an organization committed to the destruction of Israel?
The abduction of an Israeli soldier in the Gaza Strip, as well as the abduction and subsequent murder of an 18-year old Israeli civilian in the West Bank, have brought to the fore that question, which has haunted Israeli-Palestinian relations since Hamas won parliamentary elections in January.
The international community, led by the “Quartet” (the United States, the European Union, the United Nations, and Russia), has put three conditions to the Hamas government if it wishes to achieve international legitimacy and continue to be supported financially.
Hamas must recognize Israel’s right to exist, stop all terrorist activities, and commit itself to carry out all previous international agreements signed by the Palestinian Authority.
To Hamas, however, they appear to undermine its very raison d'etre.
After all, this is an organization committed to the destruction of Israel – its charter calls for a holy war against all Jews – and the establishment of an Islamic state in all of historical Palestine.
Indeed, Article 22 of that charter reveals that Hamas views the Jews (together with the Freemasons and other nefarious organizations like Rotary International and the Lions Club), as responsible for the French and Bolshevik Revolutions, World War I, and World War II.
So it is no great surprise that Hamas rejected the Quartet’s conditions.
At the same time, Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas (Abu Mazen), who represents Fatah, which lost the January elections, has tried in vain to find common ground with Hamas through an ambiguous text known as “The Prisoners’ Document.”
This document was intended to serve as an implicit acceptance of Israel’s right to exist.
On the contrary, the text legitimizes continuing attacks against Israeli civilians in the West Bank, making it unacceptable to Israel – and to the international community.
One of the paradoxical results of America’s almost messianic belief in elections as a panacea for all the ills of the Middle East is that Hamas – the winner of democratic elections – has gained a degree of legitimacy that it never had before.
On the other hand, Hamas’s history and current behavior clearly indicate that it regards elections as merely a political tool, and that it is devoid of any commitment to the norms and values underlying democracy.
Fascist and communist regimes of the past, which followed a similar instrumentalist approach to democracy, come to mind here.
Yet, at the same time, the US supports Abu Mazen, trying to undermine the Hamas government, thus casting a shadow on the credibility of its own commitment to democracy.
The current violence may escalate further, and could bring down the Hamas government.
On the other hand, diplomatic means may bring about the release of the Israeli soldier and put a stop to the firing of Qassam rockets from Gaza into Israel – a daily occurrence that has challenged the credibility of the new Israeli government under Prime Minister Ehud Olmert.
But the fundamental problem is that, until now, at every historical juncture, the Palestinians refused to accept a compromise and consequently failed in nation-building.
In 1947, they refused the UN partition plan, which called for the establishments of two states in British Palestine.
In 1993, after the Oslo agreements, the Palestinian Authority established under Yasir Arafat became another militarized authoritarian regime, very much like Syria and Egypt, and did nothing to alleviate the suffering of the Palestinian refugees.
The current crisis is obviously the first serious test for Olmert and his plans for further withdrawal from Israeli-occupied territories.
But it is an even greater test for the Palestinians: will they once again be led by a radical and fanatical leadership into another national catastrophe?
Or will they finally realize that a future of independence, sovereignty, and dignity is open to them – but only if they grant the Israelis what they rightly claim for themselves?
But that decision, and its moral costs, remains in the hands of the Palestinians alone.
Alongside the debate about the European Union constitution, a debate about European values has also developed.
This debate is important not only for implanting meaning in the constitution, but will also determine the vitality and energy of the EU itself.
The EU, being the product of several great religious and philosophical traditions, is a community of values.
The ideas of the Greeks and Romans, Christianity, Judaism, humanism, and the Enlightenment have made us who we are.
Europe is the continent of Michelangelo and Montesquieu, but also of the guillotine and the gas chamber.
Indeed, the bitter experience WWII taught Europeans how fundamental is the importance of shared values.
In an impoverished, war-ravaged Europe, people yearned for peace, freedom, stability, and a new chance to prosper.
The architects of European integration - Monnet, Schuman, Adenauer, De Gasperi, and others - understood that these ideals could be achieved only by combining and interweaving the practical interests of Europe's countries.
The founders passed the torch on to the generation of Jacques Delors, Helmut Kohl, François Mitterrand, Václav Havel, Valéry Giscard d'Estaing, and others.
Their leadership made it possible for Europe to make great strides towards its post-war ideals - peace, stability, and prosperity.
In the early 1950s, Jean Monnet wrote: "We are not forming a coalition of states.
As the Union races ahead, it seems that it has lost Europe's citizens along the way.
Even in the new member states, enthusiasm for the European family of democracies is cooling.
Today's post-war generations, lacking direct memory of WWII, view Europe's great achievements - liberty, peace, and prosperity - as a given.
My generation grew up with the image of Europe as an economic form of cooperation.
A Europe of markets and money, not of man and morals, dominated the project.
Today, we are paying the price for not attending to Europe's shared values and common mission.
Until Europeans know precisely what Europe stands for, what inspires and motivates us, the Union will not be able to take joint action in the world.
It provides further guarantees that decisions will be taken by those closest to citizens, and it acknowledges the significance the values on which the Union rests: respect for human rights and dignity, liberty, democracy, equality, and the rule of law.
These shared values are the glue that binds governments together in the recognition that clinging to pure self-interest is no longer reasonable when common concerns call for a common strategy.
For what is the point of doing away with Europe's physical borders if borders between its citizens remain?
How can Europeans be happy that the Iron Curtain is gone if individuals and groups across the Union barricade themselves behind private iron curtains?
It is important for Europeans to reflect on that as they prepare for further rounds of enlargement and consider starting accession negotiations with Turkey.
The preamble of the Constitution states that Europe is "united in its diversity."
But the words "united in diversity" raise the question of where this unity lies.
These three together make it possible for Europe to open its doors to a great diversity of peoples and at the same time to speak as a community of peoples prepared to take responsibility for one another.
Making such a community a reality will not come about by believing that Europe's culture is better than others.
We will make it a reality through dialogue and deep reflection about Europe's common values.
Values must be the road that leads to what cannot be reached by markets and institutions alone - the accession of Europe's citizens to the European Union.
Only by embracing their shared values can Europeans prevent their Union from becoming a spiritless machine.
Together, Europeans must find what connects them, and derive new enthusiasm, new spirit from what they find - a spirit sorely needed to tackle the great issues of today.
After more than fifty years, Europe as a community of values remains as necessary as ever.
NEW HAVEN – The spin-doctors are hard at work talking up America’s subpar economic recovery.
Thanks to falling unemployment, rising home values, and record stock prices, an emerging consensus of forecasters, market participants, and policymakers has now concluded that the American consumer is finally back.
First, consider the facts: Over the 21 quarters since the beginning of 2008, real (inflation-adjusted) personal consumption has risen at an average annual rate of just 0.9%.
That is by far the most protracted period of weakness in real US consumer demand since the end of World War II – and a massive slowdown from the pre-crisis pace of 3.6% annual real consumption growth from 1996 to 2007.
With household consumption accounting for about 70% of the US economy, that 2.7-percentage-point gap between pre-crisis and post-crisis trends has been enough to knock 1.9 percentage points off the post-crisis trend in real GDP growth.
To appreciate fully the unique character of this consumer-demand shortfall, trends over the past 21 quarters need to be broken down into two distinct sub-periods.
First, there was a 2.2% annualized decline from the first quarter of 2008 through the second quarter of 2009.
This was crisis-driven carnage, highlighted by a 4.5% annualized collapse in the final two quarters of 2008.
Second, this six-quarter plunge was followed, from mid-2009 through early 2013, by 15 quarters of annualized consumption growth averaging just 2% – an upturn that pales in comparison with what would have been expected based on past consumer-spending cycles.
In recent speeches and discussions with current and former central bankers, I have been criticized for focusing too much on the 0.9% trend of the past 21 quarters and paying too little attention to the 2% recovery phase of the post-crisis period.
At least it’s a recovery, they claim, and a sign of healing that can be attributed mainly to the heroic, unconventional efforts of the US Federal Reserve.
One of the first concepts to which an economics student is exposed in a basic macro course is “pent-up” consumer demand.
Discretionary consumption is typically deferred during recessions, especially for long-lasting durable goods such as motor vehicles, furniture, and appliances.
Once the recession ends and recovery begins, a “stock-adjustment” response takes hold, as households compensate for foregone replacement and update their aging durable goods.
Over most of the postwar period, this post-recession release of pent-up consumer demand has been a powerful source of support for economic recovery.
In the eight recoveries since the early 1950’s (excluding the brief pop following the credit-controls-induced slump in the 1980’s), the stock-adjustment response lifted real consumption growth by 6.1%, on average, for five quarters following business-cycle downturns; spurts of 7-8% growth were not uncommon for a quarter or two.
By contrast, the release of pent-up demand in the current cycle amounted to just 3% annualized growth in the five quarters from early 2010 to early 2011.
Moreover, the strongest quarterly gain was a 4.1% increase in the fourth quarter of 2010.
The worst consumer recession in modern history, featuring a record collapse in durable-goods expenditures in 2008-2009, should have triggered an outsize surge of pent-up demand.
Instead, the release of pent-up consumer demand was literally half that of previous business cycles.
The third point is more diagnostic: The shockingly anemic pattern of post-crisis US consumer demand has resulted from a deep Japan-like balance-sheet recession.
With the benefit of hindsight, we now know that the 12-year pre-crisis US consumer-spending binge was built on a precarious foundation of asset and credit bubbles.
When those bubbles burst, consumers were left with a massive overhang of excess debt and subpar saving.
The post-bubble aversion to spending, and the related focus on balance-sheet repair, reflects what Nomura Research Institute economist Richard Koo has called a powerful “debt rejection” syndrome.
While Koo applied this framework to Japanese firms in Japan’s first lost decade of the 1990’s, it rings true for America’s crisis-battered consumers, who are still struggling with the lingering pressures of excessive debt loads, underwater mortgages, and woefully inadequate personal saving.
Through its unconventional monetary easing, the Fed is attempting to create a shortcut around the imperative of household sector balance-sheet repair.
This is where the wealth effects of now-rebounding housing prices and a surging stock market come into play.
But are these newfound wealth effects really all that they are made out to be?
Yes, the stock market is now at an all-time high – but only in current dollars.
In real terms, the S&P 500 is still 20% below its January 2000 peak.
Similarly, while the Case-Shiller index of US home prices is now up 10.2% over the year ending March 2013, it remains 28% below its 2006 peak.
Wealth creation matters, but not until it recoups the wealth destruction that preceded it.
Sadly, most American households are still far from recovery on the asset side of their balance sheets.
Moreover, though the US unemployment rate has fallen, this largely reflects an alarming decline in labor-force participation, with more than 6.5 million Americans since 2006 having given up looking for work.
At the same time, while consumer confidence is on the mend, it remains well below pre-crisis readings.
CAMBRIDGE – On November 4, Americans will elect their 44th president amidst the worst financial turmoil the country has known since the onset of the Great Depression in 1929.
Both candidates are United States senators with little experience as executives, so their ability to manage the crisis has become a central issue in the election.
At the beginning of the campaign, many observers predicted that Iraq would be the major issue in 2008.
In principle, this should help Barack Obama and the Democrats, because polls show them stronger on economic issues, whereas Republicans and John McCain do better on security issues.
After the Republican convention, polls showed McCain ahead in early September, but after the financial meltdown, Obama took the lead.
Although both men have warily embraced the $700 billion bailout of the financial sector, the contrasts between the two men are sharp.
Obama is not only the first African-American nominee of a major party, but also one of the youngest candidates ever.
McCain has experience as a naval aviator and more than two decades in the Senate.
McCain is a man of strong traditional values who prides himself on his willingness to act quickly and decisively, which he sought to do during the negotiations on the bailout by suspending his campaign to return to Washington.
That effort appears to have backfired, because the Republicans that he leads initially balked at passing the legislation.
In 2007, many people wrote off his campaign, but he had the skills to resurrect it and capture the Republican nomination.
His choice of Alaska’s Governor Sarah Palin as his running mate shook up the presidential campaign.
Obama, while an inspirational orator, has shown a cool and calm demeanor in responding to both the financial crisis and the turbulence of political campaigning.
When embarrassed by comments made by the pastor of his church, he delivered an exceptional speech about race in America.
If anything, some of Obama’s Democratic supporters wish he would show more emotion in responding to criticism.
One should be careful, however, about reading too much into national opinion polls measuring the candidates’ popular support.
American presidents are elected by an Electoral College in which each state votes in proportion to the number of members it has in Congress.
Since even the smallest states have two senators, this leads to overrepresentation of lightly populated Western states that tend to vote Republican.
In 2000, Al Gore won the popular vote, but George W. Bush prevailed in the electoral college.
Thus, the two candidates’ campaigns are focusing heavily on a dozen or so states in which voters are closely divided and could sway the electoral college outcome.
Each campaign is now desperately trying to gauge the impact of the financial crisis on these battleground states.
Not only does the Electoral College confuse predictions based on national opinion polls, but there is also the possibility of surprises which can lead to last-minute reversals.
A mistake in a presidential debate can turn the tide of public opinion overnight, as happened to President Gerald Ford in his debate with Jimmy Carter in 1976.
Conversely, Ronald Reagan’s performance in his debate with Carter in 1980 is often credited with his victory.
Another event that could turn the tables would be an “October surprise” associated with terrorism, which could switch the agenda from the financial crisis back to security, the Republicans’ stronger suit.
In 2004, shortly before the election, Osama bin Laden released a video tape that may have helped President Bush defeat Senator John Kerry.
From bin Laden’s point of view, Bush’s policies were more useful for his efforts to recruit supporters than Kerry’s might have been.
A recent BBC poll of 22 countries found that if the world could vote, Obama would win in a landslide.
The pro-Obama margin varied from 82% in Kenya (where Obama’s father was born) to 9% in India.
When Obama attracted a crowd of 200,000 to a speech in Berlin last summer, Republicans criticized him as an elitist who appeals to crowds overseas but not to blue-collar workers at home.
On the other hand, in a September poll that asked Americans to rate a series of foreign-policy goals for the next president, 83% ranked “improving America’s standing in the world” as most important.
And certainly the election of the first African-American as president would do wonders to restore the soft power that the Bush administration squandered over the past eight years.
Some people worry that Obama might be good for American soft power, but not for its hard power.
Machiavelli famously said that it is more important for a prince to be feared than to be loved.
Machiavelli may be correct, but we sometimes forget that the opposite of love is not fear, but hatred.
And Machiavelli made it clear that hatred is something a prince should carefully avoid.
When the exercise of hard power undercuts soft power, it makes leadership more difficult – as Bush found out after the invasion of Iraq.
Both McCain and Obama possess impressive hard-power political and organizational skills; otherwise, they would not be where they are today.
But when it comes to the soft power skills of emotional intelligence, vision, and communication, Obama outranks McCain.
Whether that will sway American voters wary of financial turmoil on November 4 remains to be seen.
More aid (including debt relief) and greater access to rich countries’ markets for poor countries’ products now appears to be at the top of the global agenda.
Indeed, the debate nowadays is not about what to do, but howmuch to do, and how fast.
Lost in all this are the clear lessons of the last five decades of economic development.
Foremost among these is that economic development is largely in the hands of poor nations themselves.
Countries that have done well in the recent past have done so through their own efforts.
Consider a developing country that has free and preferential market access to its largest neighbor, which also happens to be the world’s most powerful economy.
Suppose, in addition, that this country is able to send millions of its citizens to work across the border, receives a huge volume of inward investment, and is totally integrated into international production chains.
Moreover, the country’s banking system is supported by its rich neighbor’s demonstrated willingness to act as a lender of last resort.
This one faces a trade embargo in the world’s largest market, receives neither foreign aid nor any other kind of assistance from the West, is excluded from international organizations like the WTO, and is prevented from borrowing from the IMF and the World Bank.
If these external disadvantages are not debilitating enough, this economy also maintains its own high barriers on international trade (in the form of state trading, import tariffs, and quantitative restrictions).
As the reader may have guessed, these are real countries: Mexico and Vietnam.
Mexico shares a 2,000-mile long border with the United States, which provides not only privileged market access in goods and labor, but also a claim to the resources of the US Treasury (as became apparent during the 1995 peso crisis).
By contrast, America maintained a trade embargo against Vietnam until 1994, established diplomatic relations only in 1995, and did not provide most-favored nation treatment to Vietnamese imports for years after that.
Since NAFTA was signed in December 1992, Mexico’s economy has grown at an average annual rate of barely over 1% in per capita terms.
This is not only far below the rates of Asia’s economic superstars; it is also a fraction of Mexico’s own growth performance during the decades that preceded the debt crisis of 1982 (3.6% per year between 1960 and 1981).
Vietnam, however, grew at an annual rate of 5.6% per capita between the onset of its economic reforms in 1988 and the establishment of diplomatic relations with the US in 1995, and has continued to grow at a rapid 4.5% pace since then.
Vietnam witnessed a dramatic fall in poverty, while in Mexico real wages fell.
Both countries experienced sharp increases in international trade and foreign investment, but the pictures are utterly different where it counts most: rising standards of living, particularly for the poor.
What these examples show is that domestic efforts trump everything else in determining a country’s economic fortunes.
All the opportunities that the US market presented to Mexico could not offset the consequences of policy mistakes at home, especially the failure to reverse the real appreciation of the peso’s exchange rate and the inability to extend the productivity gains achieved in a narrow range of export activities to the rest of the economy.
With none of Mexico’s advantages, Vietnam pursued a strategy that focused on diversifying its economy and enhancing the productive capacity of domestic suppliers.
Broader post-war experience supports the conclusion that domestic policies are what matter most.
South Korea took off in the early 1960’s not when foreign aid was at its apex, but when it was being phased out.
China and India, today’s two economic superstars, have prospered largely through sui generis reform efforts.
It is tempting to ascribe the rare African successes – Botswana and Mauritius – to foreign demand for their exports (diamonds and garments, respectively), but that story goes only so far.
But, as in other cases of successful development, what distinguishes them is not the external advantages they possess, but their ability to exploit these advantages.
Witness the mess that other countries made of their natural-resource endowments.
The word “diamond” hardly conjures images of peace and prosperity in Sierra Leone.
Similarly, few of the export processing zones proliferating around the world have delivered the results observed in Mauritius.
They can make the world less hospitable for corrupt dictators – for example, by greater sharing of financial information and by not recognizing the international contracts that they sign.
Similarly, increasing the number of poor-country workers allowed to work in rich countries, and providing greater scope for growth-oriented policies by relaxing WTO rules and conditionality from the US, would produce greater long-term development impact.
It is far from clear that expanding market access and boosting aid are the most productive use of valuable political capital in the North.
Development should focus not on trade and aid, but on improving the policy environment in poor countries.
BERKELEY – Between 1950 and 1990 – the days of old-fashioned inflation-fighting downturns engineered by the United States Federal Reserve – America’s post-recession unemployment rate would fall on average 32.4% over the course of a year from its initial value toward its natural rate.
If the US unemployment rate had started to follow such a path after peaking in the second half of 2009, it would now stand at 8.3%, rather than 8.9%.
Unfortunately, none of the net reduction in the US unemployment rate over the past year came from increases in the employment-to-population ratio; all of it came from declining labor-force participation.
Unemployment has fallen from 10.1% over the course of the past 18 months, but the employment-to-population ratio has remained stuck at 58.4%.
Perhaps it would be better if unemployed people who could have jobs – and who at full employment would have them – were actively looking for work rather than out of the labor force completely.
If you take that view, between 1950 and 1990, the US employment-to-population ratio would rise an extra 0.227% annually on average for each year that the unemployment rate was above its natural rate.
If the US employment-to-population ratio had started to follow such a path after its 2009 peak, the current ratio would be 59.7%, rather than 58.4%.
(In that case, we would be experiencing “morning in America,” rather than the current state of economic malaise.)
This is, I think, the best metric to use to quantify the decidedly sub-par pace of today’s jobless recovery in the US.
It is not out of line with other American yardsticks: since the output trough, real GDP has grown at an average rate of 2.86%/year, barely above the rate of growth of the US economy’s productive potential.
And it is not out of line with the experience of other rich economies, whether Japan or in Europe.
Indeed, today’s US predicament contrasts sharply only with the current experiences of developing Asia.
There, real GDP growth and declining unemployment show a solid, well-entrenched, and rapid recovery – to the point that inflation will soon become a more significant macroeconomic problem than job creation.
The obvious hypothesis to explain why the current US recovery – like the previous two – has proceeded at a sub-par pace is that the speed of any recovery is linked to what caused the downturn.
A pre-1990 recession was triggered by a Fed decision to switch policy from business-as-usual to inflation-fighting.
The Fed would then cause a liquidity squeeze and so distort asset prices as to make much construction, sizable amounts of other investment, and some consumption goods unaffordable (and thus unprofitable to produce).
The resulting excess supply of goods, services, and labor would cause inflation to fall.
As soon as the Fed had achieved its inflation-fighting goal, however, it would end the liquidity squeeze.
And all the lines of business that had been profitable before the downturn would become profitable once again.
From an entrepreneurial standpoint, therefore, recovery was a straightforward matter: simply pick up where you left off and do what you used to do.
After the most recent US downturn, however (and to a lesser extent after its two predecessors), things have been different.
The downturn was not caused by a liquidity squeeze, so the Fed cannot wave its wand and return asset prices to their pre-recession configuration.
And that means that the entrepreneurial problems of are much more complex, for recovery is not a matter of reviving what used to be profitable to produce, but rather of figuring out what will be profitable to produce in the future.
As the economist Dan Kuehn likes to say, a recession is like somebody knocking your jigsaw puzzle, disturbing the pieces, and turning some of them over.
When the Fed ends a liquidity squeeze, it turns the pieces right side up.
Now, however, there is no one to turn the pieces right side up, so things are much harder to correct.
Indeed, I believe that things are even worse: as long as aggregate demand remains low, we cannot even tell which pieces are right side up.
New investments, lines of business, and worker-firm matches that would be highly productive and profitable at normal levels of capacity utilization and unemployment are unprofitable now.
So, what America needs now is not just a recovery in demand, but also structural adjustment.
And it cannot produce structural adjustment at all until a demand recovery is well under way.
MADRID – There is an old rule of thumb in diplomacy: if you cannot reach agreement on an issue, expand the scope of the discussion.
Today, the United States may be set to turn this approach on its head, broadening the discussion to destroy an already-existing agreement.
And not just any agreement: President Donald Trump’s administration wants to dismantle the Iran nuclear deal.
But while Trump described that deal as an “embarrassment” in his address to the United Nations, the international community’s agreement with Iran is actually one of the most important diplomatic achievements of the last decade.
With power distributed among a seemingly endless array of forces and figures, which often contradict or even compete with one another, the negotiating environment is difficult to understand, much less navigate.
In this context, reaching a “grand bargain” that would address the full range of Iran’s bad behavior – not just its nuclear and missile programs, but also its support for international terrorism, regional destabilization, and human-rights violations – is unrealistic.
To get anywhere, the subject matter must be kept as narrow and discrete as possible.
The resulting Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) is a misnomer.
It does not address nuclear-related weapons programs or guarantee inspections in military installations.
Instead, it was meant to take the existential threat of Iran’s nuclear program off the table long enough to build a foundation for more constructive engagement that could bring progress on other fronts.
Yet, before long, the diplomatic window that the JCPOA opened may be slammed shut.
Under US law, the president is required to certify to Congress every 90 days that Iran has not breached the agreement, and that the continued suspension of sanctions is “vital to the national security interests” of the US.
In early September, Nikki Haley, the US ambassador to the United Nations, suggested that to torpedo the deal, Trump could simply argue that Iran’s other misdeeds were damaging enough to merit sanctions.
The point of the JCPOA was to take the nuclear issue off the table, in order to enable the parties to address everything else.
If the US puts everything else back on the table all at once, the deal will collapse.
In that case, getting Iran back to the negotiating table would be virtually impossible.
The US alone would be unable to impose sufficiently powerful sanctions on Iran to secure that outcome, while the European Union – the primary architect of the JCPOA – would be highly unlikely to re-impose sanctions on an Iran that is complying with its commitments.
The JCPOA is a rare recent example of international cooperation, and demonstrates the viability of a broad-based sanctions regime.
In this sense, it provided a major boost to the global rules-based order – upon which Europe, in particular, depends.
By bringing about its demise, the Trump administration could severely undermine future multilateral initiatives.
From a regional perspective, the end of the JCPOA would hasten America’s marginalization in the Middle East.
The Iran deal was a key element of President Barack Obama’s effort to extricate the US from the region, as it promised to neutralize one of the main sources of instability necessitating continued US attention.
But, far from restoring the status quo ante, killing the deal would leave America with little credibility in Middle Eastern affairs.
In the short term, the strategic vacuum would be filled partly by Russia, which has already seized on America’s gradual withdrawal from the region to strengthen its foothold there.
Having established itself as a pivotal power through its military involvement in Syria, Russia is now using its energy resources to expand its influence further – with far-reaching geopolitical and security implications.
Already, the state-controlled oil company Rosneft has struck deals in Egypt, Iraqi Kurdistan, and Libya, while its counterpart Zarubezhneft has been pursuing oil and gas development projects in Iran.
Meanwhile, the Russian gas giant Gazprom has forged ahead with construction of the so-called TurkStream pipeline.
Add to that the pending Nord Stream 2 pipeline, which will link Russia directly to Germany, and the EU’s prospects for diversifying its energy supplies – critical to its energy security – are fading fast.
In the longer run, the absence of the US from the Middle East will probably serve to prolong the chaos and destruction that has defined this decade, with intensifying – and increasingly overwhelming – repercussions for Europe.
To be sure, there is an alternative scenario: Iran, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey could reach a tacit (or even active) agreement regarding influence in the region, to the exclusion of outside parties.
But, given longstanding hostilities in the region, the emergence of such an order is far from guaranteed.
The JCPOA offered a model for counter-proliferation efforts, which included the decoupling of nuclear power – a safe and reliable energy source – from proliferation of nuclear weapons.
If this model is rejected after the fact by the Trump administration, its future application elsewhere will become much more difficult, if not impossible.
To that end, they should establish a relationship with Iran that goes beyond junkets to facilitate European investment or promote the planned energy partnership, and that addresses other outstanding issues, such as ballistic missiles, terrorism, and human rights.
Success will require tough talk, conditionality, and, yes, more sanctions.
But it is the JCPOA that should serve as the platform for such action.
NEW YORK – The battle with the United States over China’s exchange rate continues.
When the Great Recession began, many worried that protectionism would rear its ugly head.
True, G-20 leaders promised that they had learned the lessons of the Great Depression.
But 17 of the G-20’s members introduced protectionist measures just months after the first summit in November 2008.
The “Buy American” provision in the United States’ stimulus bill got the most attention.
Continuing economic weakness in the advanced economies risks a new round of protectionism.
In America, for example, more than one in six workers who would like a full-time job can’t find one.
These were among the risks associated with America’s insufficient stimulus, which was designed to placate members of Congress as much as it was to revive the economy.
With soaring deficits, a second stimulus appears unlikely, and, with monetary policy at its limits and inflation hawks being barely kept at bay, there is little hope of help from that department, either.
The US Treasury has been charged by Congress to assess whether China is a “currency manipulator.”
Although President Obama has now delayed for some months when Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner must issue his report, the very concept of “currency manipulation” itself is flawed: all governments take actions that directly or indirectly affect the exchange rate.
Reckless budget deficits can lead to a weak currency; so can low interest rates.
Until the recent crisis in Greece, the US benefited from a weak dollar/euro exchange rate.
Should Europeans have accused the US of “manipulating” the exchange rate to expand exports at its expense?
Although US politicians focus on the bilateral trade deficit with China – which is persistently large – what matters is the multilateral balance.
When demands for China to adjust its exchange rate began during George W. Bush’s administration, its multilateral trade surplus was small.
More recently, however, China has been running a large multilateral surplus as well.
Saudi Arabia also has a bilateral and multilateral surplus: Americans want its oil, and Saudis want fewer US products.
Even in absolute value, Saudi Arabia’s multilateral merchandise surplus of $212 billion in 2008 dwarfs China’s $175 billion surplus; as a percentage of GDP, Saudi Arabia’s current-account surplus, at 11.5% of GDP, is more than twice that of China.
Saudi Arabia’s surplus would be far higher were it not for US armaments exports.
In a global economy with deficient aggregate demand, current-account surpluses are a problem.
But China’s current-account surplus is actually less than the combined figure for Japan and Germany; as a percentage of GDP, it is 5%, compared to Germany’s 5.2%.
America’s multilateral trade deficit will not be significantly narrowed until America saves significantly more; while the Great Recession induced higher household savings (which were near zero), this has been more than offset by the increased government deficits.
Adjustment in the exchange rate is likely simply to shift to where America buys its textiles and apparel – from Bangladesh or Sri Lanka, rather than China.
Meanwhile, an increase in the exchange rate is likely to contribute to inequality in China, as its poor farmers face increasing competition from America’s highly subsidized farms.
This is the real trade distortion in the global economy – one in which millions of poor people in developing countries are hurt as America helps some of the world’s richest farmers.
During the 1997-1998 Asian financial crisis, the renminbi’s stability played an important role in stabilizing the region.
So, too, the renminbi’s stability has helped the region maintain strong growth, from which the world as a whole benefits.
Some argue that China needs to adjust its exchange rate to prevent inflation or bubbles.
Inflation remains contained, but, more to the point, China’s government has an arsenal of other weapons (from taxes on capital inflows and capital-gains taxes to a variety of monetary instruments) at its disposal.
But exchange rates do affect the pattern of growth, and it is in China’s own interest to restructure and move away from high dependence on export-led growth.
China recognizes that its currency needs to appreciate over the long run, and politicizing the speed at which it does so has been counterproductive.
(Since it began revaluing its exchange rate in July 2005, the adjustment has been half or more of what most experts think is required.)
Since China’s multilateral surplus is the economic issue and many countries are concerned about it, the US should seek a multilateral, rules-based solution.
Imposing unilateral duties after unilaterally labeling China a “currency manipulator” would undermine the multilateral system, with little payoff.
China might respond by imposing duties on those American products effectively directly or indirectly subsidized by America’s massive bailouts of its banks and car companies.
So America should be wary of igniting one in the midst of an uncertain global recovery – as popular as it might be with politicians whose constituents are justly concerned about high unemployment, and as easy as it is to look for blame elsewhere.
Unfortunately, this global crisis was made in America, and America must look inward, not only to revive its economy, but also to prevent a recurrence.
MADRID – On the evening of October 10, Catalonia’s separatist president, Carles Puigdemont, stood before the regional parliament to deliver what was widely expected to be a unilateral declaration of independence.
Despite asserting “the mandate that Catalonia become an independent state in the form of a republic,” he proposed “suspending the effects of the declaration of independence to undertake talks in the coming weeks.”
Puigdemont was not addressing anti-independence protesters on the streets of Barcelona, or Spanish citizens more broadly.
Like his fellow Catalan separatists, Puigdemont knows that the movement’s only chance of moving forward lies in internationalization.
Since the Catalan regional government held an illegal referendum on independence on October 1, its separatist leaders and their sympathizers have called repeatedly for international mediation in their standoff with the Spanish government.
The goal, exemplified by Puigdemont in his speech, is to make Catalonia appear magnanimous, in order to get the international community on its side.
The call for dialogue – such a sleek and simple request, fitting neatly into a 140-character tweet – resonates with much of the international media and the broader nebula known as the “international community.”
International doyens, including former United Nations Secretary-General Kofi Annan and his fellow Nobel Peace Prize laureate Desmond Tutu, have also called for dialogue.
At its core, a democratic system is simply a legal framework – underpinned by a constitution – that facilitates discussion and dispute resolution.
If there is a problem with the framework, the constitution can be changed, though this cannot be done frivolously.
It is when dialogue is pushed beyond the system’s constitutional bounds that the problem arises.
There is no need to engage in the give and take of democracy if one can simply circumvent its ground rules.
And, with all due respect for Annan and Tutu, this is what external mediation would amount to – and it would threaten to cripple Spanish democracy.
That is why the world – and especially Europe – must resist Catalan separatists’ calls for international mediation.
Nothing less than the future of the rule of law and constitutional democracy in Spain – and elsewhere – depends on it.
What is happening in Catalonia is a problem for the Spanish nation and, in particular, for a divided Catalan society.
And, while Spain is a relatively young democracy, it is also a mature one, having endured many challenges in the 42 years since the death of the dictator Francisco Franco.
The good news is that, so far, the European Union and its member states have taken precisely this stance.
French President Emmanuel Macron rejected European intervention, declaring that it would “give reason to those who do not respect the rule of law.”
At the European level, European Council President Donald Tusk, despite some ambiguous statements on the topic, urged Puigdemont to “respect the constitutional order.”
European Commission Vice President Frans Timmermans declared that the Catalan regional authorities had “chosen to ignore the law,” and that if one of the three pillars of European societies – “democracy, respect for the rule of law, and human rights” – is removed, “the others will fall. too.”
But the pressure to internationalize – or, specifically, to “Europeanize” – the crisis will continue.
They know that scenes of violence, or even a prolonged stalemate, would weaken European leaders’ resolve not to get involved.
They also know that in an increasingly intergovernmental EU, some member states would not necessarily consider the prospect of a weakened Spain to be a negative outcome.
Facilitating the erosion of the rule of law and democracy should be anathema to its leaders.
It should also be abhorrent to member states, which continue to guard their sovereignty and prerogatives.
More broadly, if democracy in Spain, in the heart of Western Europe, can be weakened so fundamentally, so can democracy everywhere.
If, however, Spain is given the space to work through the challenge it faces, the rule of law will be reinvigorated.
For those who proclaim themselves to be champions of liberal democracy, short-circuiting that possibility is as irresponsible as it is hypocritical.
PARIS – The World Monetary and Economic Conference took place in London 76 years ago, in June 1933, with 66 countries meeting to put an end to the unfolding monetary disorder and trade wars while trying to draw the lessons of the Great Depression.
On April 2, 2009, world leaders will head to London again to find a solution to a financial and economic crisis as dire as that of 1929.
If collective inaction prevails, we risk a return to the political and economic woes of the 1930’s, which paved the way to a devastating world conflict.
Of course, we must respond to both the weakening economy and financial instability in a virtual state of emergency.
This is why stimulus packages and financial rescue plans were for the first time adopted concomitantly in Europe, the United States, and some large Asian countries.
At the G-20 finance ministers meeting on March 14, all of our countries did their best and made massive efforts to repair their economic machinery as fast as possible.
The policies chosen are different, but all states favor solutions that seem most appropriate to them.
Like its partners, France has launched significant stimulus measures, with a plan announced by President Nicolas Sarkozy last December, as well as public investments and early repayment of government debt.
If we also take into account the strengthening of social services and legal policies launched last month, France’s stimulus in 2009 totals more than 2% of its GDP, with committed future outflows equaling the US.
Moreover, the impact of automatic stabilizers – which enable the government to mobilize more or less fiscal resources, depending on economic conditions – is more powerful in Western Europe than in most of the Anglo-Saxon countries.
Yet America’s macroeconomic situation seems worse than Europe’s in terms of consumption, banking, or employment and housing markets.
But, as both Sarkozy and US President Barack Obama have insisted, we must go further.
And confidence can be restored only if the financial system is fully overhauled.
We obviously need to strike at the root of the problem, which requires us to redefine the basic principles of the system.
It would be counterproductive to focus on treating the symptoms, only to realize later that the unprecedented budgets for structural policies are neither economically efficient nor politically acceptable.
At the Washington Summit last November, the EU suggested a basic principle: all markets, all territories, and all actors putting the global financial system at risk should be monitored.
This principle, to which all agreed, must be enforced even if it upsets old habits and comfortable incomes.
I am especially convinced that we must closely monitor actors in financial markets such as hedge funds.
Although hedge funds sometimes account for 50% of market transactions, they are not registered or subject to rules on transparency.
Fighting for transparency also implies confronting states that refuse to collaborate on financial issues at a global level or to combat money laundering or prevent financial risks.
We cannot build a safer system if we do not raise global requirements and if we tolerate non-compliance with the rules.
Together with Germany, France intends to draw up a list of uncooperative countries and to design a tool kit of appropriate sanctions.
New auditing standards must reflect an overhauled financial architecture that focuses on transparency.
The aim of such standards must be to attenuate the impact of financial failure, not amplify it, as has occurred in the crisis.
Indeed, the rating agencies, whose malfunctions contributed to the crisis, must be regulated.
We demand an easy policy: stricter rules (especially when fighting conflicts of interest), a specific rating scale for complex products, and regular publication of their returns.
Europe followed this path when preparing, under the recent French presidency, a European regulation that will soon be adopted.
Responsibility must be put back at the heart of a system that has sunk into excess.
We yielded to short-term incentives, and everything seemed to conspire to push us to accepting excessive risks.
We must revise compensation schemes and delay bonus payments until the long-term profitability of a firm’s investments is known.
Weakened by this crisis, they are the first to suffer from the cuts in financial flows.
The international financial institutions must support them massively, and also have the resources needed to foresee global unbalances and prevent crises, rather than respond only when events become urgent.
France and its European partners, in particular Germany, with which we worked in tight collaboration, will suggest all these points to the G-20.
Indeed, just as a national fiscal stimulus is less efficient than a coordinated effort, strengthening financial regulations without combating the laxity that prevails elsewhere makes no sense in a globalized world.
We should not delude ourselves; we cannot solve all the problems of this crisis in the coming days.
We must, however, reach several objectives and give clear signs of a true collective ambition.
That proclamation by British Prime Minister David Cameron, following hard on the heels of similar renunciations of multiculturalism by German Chancellor Angela Merkel and French President Nicolas Sarkozy, suggests that a page is being turned in European society.
“Frankly,” he said, “we need a lot less of the passive tolerance of recent years and a much more active, muscular liberalism.”
He was not criticizing ethnic and cultural pluralism, but the idea of “state multiculturalism,” which applies different moral standards to various social groups.
In the future, Cameron declared, Muslim groups that do not, for example, endorse women’s rights, defend freedom of expression, or promote integration would lose all government funding.
It is not just official multiculturalism that has failed in Europe, however; so has the multiculturalism endorsed by large parts of European civil society.
Sweden, one of the most liberal countries in the world, but also one that has recently seen a surge in extremism, is a case in point.
Homosexuals have been able to register civil partnerships since 1995 and marry since 2009, and the country is one of the most radical in its understanding of women’s rights – as WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange can attest.
Moreover, Sweden’s far-reaching freedom of expression is one reason why Assange located WikiLeaks’ servers in the country.
But Sweden’s freedom of expression was also one of the motives behind a grisly suicide attack in Stockholm in December of last year.
According to a last testament left behind by the attacker, a Swedish citizen named Taimour Abdulwahab, Christmas shoppers in downtown Stockholm had to die in retaliation for “the Swedes’ support” for Lars Vilks, an artist who stirred outrage in the country with drawings of the Prophet Muhammad as a dog.
Vilks argued that his work was a provocation aimed at revealing the selective liberalism within the Swedish intellectual establishment – its multiculturalism, one could say.
The Stockholm suicide bombing was not the first act of violence linked to Vilks.
Two young men were recently sentenced to prison for trying to set fire to the artist’s home.
During a lecture at Uppsala University last summer, a mob attacked Vilks, a professor of art history, while crying Allahu akbar.
The then 64-year-old artist was head-butted, but escaped serious injury thanks to heavy police protection.
What is remarkable is not just the violence and threats against Vilks – anyone who doubts the determination of Islamist extremists in Sweden should watch the YouTube clip from that lecture – but also the reaction from the otherwise radically secular Swedish establishment.
A number of influential Swedish intellectuals and politicians have directed their harshest criticism against Vilks, not against those who have called for censorship and even incited violence.
Only a few of the country’s newspapers and political magazines published Vilks’ drawings.
Like murdered Dutch filmmaker Theo van Gogh and the British novelist Salman Rushdie before him, Vilks was criticized by liberals and the left for causing unrest with his art.
In this respect, Vilks’ work must be regarded as having succeeded in exposing moral double standards – no matter what one thinks of the drawing itself.
In Sweden, just as in similarly liberal Holland and Denmark, right-wing populists have profited from liberals’ failure to stand up for their values.
The Sweden Democrats (SD), a party with roots in the country’s white-supremacist movement, entered the parliament for the first time in September 2010, with the support of 5.7% of the Swedish electorate.
The SD has sought to position itself as the sole defender of gays and Jews in the face of intolerance stoked by large-scale Muslim immigration in the past two decades.
Swedes who stand far from the SD’s original platform are apparently willing to be represented by a party that until recently was full of neo-Nazis.
Thus, the lack of “muscular liberalism” in one of the world’s most liberal countries has paved the way for both Islamists and right-wing populists.
Europe’s leading politicians have spoken out, and now it is time for European civil society – its newspapers, critics, curators, academics, and publishers – to declare the failure of multiculturalism and show some courage in defending the values they claim to embody.
ISTANBUL: After months of tension that almost triggered military intervention, Turkey has reached a crossroads.
Turkey's military and political old guard claim that the modern system introduced by Kemal Ataturk to replace the Ottoman caliphate almost 75 years ago separates mosque and state.
Yet the largest bloc of voters in the December 1993 democratic elections, which were weighted in favor of traditional political parties, supported Refah, or Welfare, Turkey's largest Islamist party.
Despite weeks of efforts by the same traditional elites to block it, Refah went on to form a coalition government.
The most secular state in the Muslim world suddenly had an Islamist prime minister, Necmettin Erbakan, who espoused some openly Islamist goals.
These changes left Turkey, a key state bridging East and West, pitting identity against ideology.
The choices: To remain secular, Turkey may have to become undemocratic; to remain democratic, it may have to give up its strictly secular foundation.
Refah's coalition partner -- the True Path party of former Prime Minister Tansu Ciller -- was secular.
But Turkey's top generals and an array of parties, left and right, fussed and stewed over the potential for the emergence of an Islamist state if Refah remained in power.
Refah wanted women to be allowed to once again don modest religious dress; for children to be able to go to religious parochial schools through middle school.
It talked about moving the day of rest from Sunday to Friday, the Muslim sabbath, in an overwhelmingly Muslim country.
But soon the secular press began writing about creeping Islamization, and the military started issuing public and private warnings.
In meetings with judges, academics, journalists and civil leaders, the top brass pointed out that Turkish law calls on the army to protect the "secular state."
In early June, the generals proclaimed that they were prepared to intervene--as they had in 1960, 1971 and l980 -- if they deemed it necessary.
The immediate crisis passed when Erbakan succumbed to pressure and resigned June 18, a move he hoped would allow his coalition partner to take over.
The brokered deal had Ciller, who was deputy prime minister and foreign minister, switching places with Erbakan.
Instead, President Suleyman Demirel turned to the conservative Motherland party and Mesut Yilmaz to form a new government.
(In the 1995 elections, Motherland won the second highest number of seats in parliament and True Path came in third.)
So Turkey’s political system came, once more, under the control of a secular party.
But the central issue--whether or not there is a place for a religious party in a democracy--is unlikely to go away, for several reasons.
Refah remains the largest party; its 22% of the vote in 1995 parliamentary elections translated into almost a third of the parliament’s 550 seats.
Despite the loss of the premiership, it is still a powerful political force.
New elections, which look unavoidable in the next year, are unlikely to change that fact -- unless the party is banned.
Excluding Refah -- either by ousting or outlawing it -- could backfire.
In May, the state prosecutor filed a suit in Turkey's constitutional court to have Refah, which is not a new party by any means, banned on the grounds that it is a religious party in a secular state.
There is also talk about legislative moves designed in part to isolate or marginalize Refah.
One proposal is a shift from a parliamentary system to a presidential system; another seeks to cut back the number of major parties from seven to two or three--aimed partly at consolidating voters in secular parties that would outnumber Refah,.
Refah's followers would probably try to form another party with a similar mandate but without the formal symbols or language of an Islamist movement.
A more ominous possibility is that some, even many, of its followers could be forced underground and into extralegal activities.
A movement now prepared to work within the system would be radicalized -- with all the dangers such a move entails.
Refah is likely to remain a major political force as long as the traditional parties do not clean up their acts.
While many voters selected Refah because of its platform, others turned to a religious party as a means of rejecting the traditional parties and their exclusionary tactics.
A tiny core of politicians have dominated Turkish politics for a generation or two, miring politics in divisive rivalries, power games and corruption.
Ciller is widely believed to have forged an alliance with Refah, which she once condemned as more dangerous to Turkey than the rebellious Kurds to protect herself from the very charges of corruption that Turkey's new government now seems poised to bring against her.
So trying to squelch the party -- in court, at the hands of the military, or through legislation -- may only flaw Turkey's political system further.
Between February and June this year, the generals demanded that private Koranic instruction be brought under government control, that all Islamist social activities be restricted, that public and school dress codes be fully secular, and that the number of pupils in religious schools be limited.
It talked of a foreign policy that looked more toward Turkey's cultural and religious brethren than to the West.
It put forth dotty ideas about an Islamic common market, Islamic NATO, and an Islamic currency.
Turkey continued to allow the U.S.-led "Operation Provide Comfort" against Iraq to use Turkish bases.
Relations with Israel actually improved with more visits by ranking Turkish officials than ever before -- a move orchestrated by Ciller but accepted by Refah.
Over the next year, Turkish politicians would do well to remember that record and the broader context of the party's appeal as the fate of Refah and key questions about Turkey's political system are determined.
GAZA CITY – In the wake of revolutionary change in the Middle East, the forces of political Islam have scored one electoral victory after another.
As the West grapples with the rapid rise of moderate Islamists in Tunisia, Morocco, and Egypt, the issue of Hamas’s role in the Palestinian territories looms large.
The signing of a new unity deal between Hamas and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas’s secular Fatah party earlier this month has heightened an unprecedented struggle within Hamas over its future course as an Islamist movement.
As events in recent weeks have proven, Hamas’s days of near-total isolation in the Middle East are over.
While most Western governments continue to consider it a terrorist organization, in Arab capitals, political embargos have given way to engagement.
In December, Ismail Haniyeh, Prime Minister of the Hamas-led Palestinian Authority in Gaza, embarked on a tour of the Mediterranean that included stops in Tunis, Cairo, and Istanbul.
In mid-February, he was warmly received in Qatar, Bahrain, and Iran.
In January, Khaled Mashal, the leader of Hamas’s Damascus-based political bureau, embarked on a diplomatic initiative of his own, and was hosted by King Abdullah of Jordan – the first such visit in more than a decade.
In February, Mashal crowned these efforts in Qatar with the signing of the new unity agreement with Fatah, which commits both Palestinian movements to a transitional government under Abbas’s leadership.
Ever since, disagreements within Hamas have been escalating, pitting the movement’s Diaspora leadership against the Hamas-led Gaza administration, which has openly rejected the unity deal.
While personal ambitions certainly play a role in the tensions, what lies at the core is a fundamental conflict over Hamas’s character.
Haniyeh, who represents the conservative wing of Gaza’s Hamas leadership, has sought to cash in on regional changes.
His long-boycotted government was thrown a lifeline by regime change in Egypt and the opening of the border with Gaza.
Notably, Haniyeh’s recent diplomatic tour garnered not only symbolic recognition for Hamas, but also support for his uncompromising stance vis-à-vis Israel.
He missed no opportunity to criticize “futile” peace negotiations, and, in Tehran, he pledged that Hamas’s “resistance” would continue “until all Palestinian land has been liberated.”
In a further telling move, Haniyeh also recently suggested merging Hamas with the Islamic Jihad movement, which continues to target Israeli civilians with rockets fired from Gaza.
Mashal, by contrast, has come to represent a force of change.
Last May, he signed an initial reconciliation agreement with Fatah in Cairo, which committed Hamas to a Palestinian unity government, called for a cessation of violence, and accepted the notion of a Palestinian state on the 1967 borders.
Mashal also offered Abbas a one-year mandate for negotiations with Israel, and, unlike Haniyeh, supported recent Israeli-Palestinian “exploratory talks” in Jordan.
One reason for Mashal’s change of heart can be found in the ongoing popular revolt in Syria against President Bashar al-Assad.
The leader of the Sunni Hamas can no longer support his Syrian host, who has cracked down on the Sunni-dominated opposition.
Thus, Mashal has attempted to close ranks with Fatah, and is seeking to move Hamas’s Diaspora headquarters from Damascus – a powerful symbol of his efforts at re-invention.
But Mashal’s refusal to support Assad has not only forced him to re-locate.
It has also unleashed the wrath of Syria’s ally, Iran, which has responded by scaling down its financial support for Hamas – thus denying Mashal a key source of influence within the movement.
Indeed, Mashal’s decision has effectively ended his ties to his two most important allies, thereby not only weakening his position, but also increasing his readiness to embrace political moderation.
Tensions increased dramatically when Mashal signed the unity agreement with Fatah, after stating his intention to resign as head of the political bureau.
While that announcement may have been political blackmail aimed at forcing Gaza into line, it underscored Mashal’s confidence in his popularity, which has since been vindicated by expressions of support from both within and outside of the political bureau for him to remain in charge.
He may reemerge as the head of a newly established Palestinian branch of the Muslim Brotherhood, or as a leader of a new Islamist political party under the umbrella of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
Such a merging of Hamas with the established Palestinian political organizations would signify Hamas’s formal acceptance of a two-state solution, and would mark an important step in transforming the movement.
For the West, using the opportunity to influence Hamas’s future course requires modifying the failed policy of all-encompassing rejection.
As in Egypt, Morocco, and Tunisia, Islamist moderates in the Palestinian territories need to be engaged as a legitimate political force.
Leaders such as Mashal, who has expressed a readiness to forsake alliances with Syria and Iran and to accept a two-state solution with Israel, should be bolstered rather than boycotted.
That means supporting the ongoing effort to form an interim Palestinian government of technocrats, as stipulated in the Qatar agreement.
But the United States, European governments, and Israel should take this opportunity to engage Hamas’s moderates and test their flexibility.
In the new Middle East, the West’s current approach will only strengthen the hardliners in Gaza and elsewhere.
STANFORD – If one looks past the headlines of the media’s full-time Donald Trump coverage, one can discern a global shift in political, economic, and cultural forces that might prove far more consequential for America and the world than the actual Trump presidency.
Chief among these changes is the fraying of relations between central and subnational, and national and supranational, governments.
Americans primarily interact with government at the state and local level, through schools and roads, police and hospitals.
And in California, among other states, demands for greater local autonomy are growing louder, occasionally echoing the rhetoric of Catalan secessionists or Brexiteers in the United Kingdom.
With near-monopoly control of California’s state and local governments, the Democrats are trying to negate the effects of virtually all of Trump’s policies.
For example, a bill in the state legislature would offset the new federal tax law’s limit on state income- and property-tax deductions – a provision that will hit California hard because it has one of the highest tax rates in the country, and its residents own expensive homes.
Under the proposed state law, Californians would be allowed to “donate” their state taxes to a state shell charity as tax-deductible charitable contributions.
Charitable contributions are deductible at the federal level only if the donor receives no more than incidental value for the contribution, which obviously wouldn’t be the case in this situation.
In fact, not even the fair-market value of a meal at a charity dinner is deductible.
Effective next year, the new federal tax law also repeals the individual mandate of the 2010 Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), which imposes a fine on those who do not purchase health insurance.
Because the repeal could accelerate a surge in Obamacare insurance premiums, many California Democrats are demanding a single-payer government-funded health-care system, like those in Canada and Europe.
Moreover, because California considers itself the vanguard of green energy, state agencies have responded to Trump’s proposal to open up offshore oil drilling by threatening to ban the transportation of oil through the state, even in existing pipelines.
Since declaring itself a “sanctuary city” in 1989, San Francisco has prohibited its police force from cooperating fully with federal immigration agents.
But, as of last year, the entire state has been declared a “sanctuary,” and California Attorney General Xavier Becerra now plans to fine employers that cooperate with federal immigration officials.
With tensions between federal and state law-enforcement agencies rising, many Californians are being put in the untenable position of paying state fines or violating federal laws.
While the overwhelming majority of illegal immigrants are working to support their families and improve the lives of their children, some commit serious crimes or belong to violent gangs.
Trump focuses on the latter to make the case for increased border security, often invoking examples of Americans killed by illegal immigrants who have returned after being repeatedly deported.
Trump’s opponents argue that illegal immigrants themselves are often victims of – or witnesses to – serious crimes, but are reluctant to go to the police because they fear deportation.
Both sides have a point; but, sadly, they have ceased engaging with each other.
Thus, when the Trump White House recently proposed a plan for immigration reform that offered something to both sides, it was instantly denounced by anti-immigration activists and pro-immigration crusaders alike.
Specifically, the plan would grant permanent legal status and a path to citizenship for 1.8 million people who were brought or sent to the country illegally as children.
That is more than twice the number of people who were protected under former President Barack Obama’s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) program.
In exchange, Trump wants an additional $25 billion for security on the border with Mexico – including his promised wall – and reforms to limit family-based legal immigration and favor higher-skilled workers, which is the norm in most developed countries.
Anti-immigration hardliners have rejected Trump’s plan as a form of amnesty.
At the same time, the Democratic leader in the House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi, has described it as a scheme to “make America white again.”
But here’s the rub: The Trump administration’s plan is the most realistic immigration-reform proposal in decades.
If the Democrats were smart, they would curb their detestation, and recognize that Trump’s credibility with anti-immigration Republicans puts him in an ideal position to negotiate a bipartisan package.
As California continues its efforts to negate the Trump administration’s policies, one wonders if its approach will lead to a constitutional challenge.
States certainly have the legal authority to adopt policies that are at odds with federal policy.
In fact, the Tenth Amendment of the US Constitution explicitly reserves for the states all powers not delegated to the federal government.
And states may sue the federal government, as Republican governors and attorneys general have done to overturn several Obama-era regulations and executive orders.
But the US Supreme Court has repeatedly ruled that states may not nullify or contravene federal law – a right some southern states claimed in the mid-twentieth century to resist school integration.
This is a constitutional principle that dates back to the mid-nineteenth century, when the Supreme Court overturned a Wisconsin Supreme Court ruling that nullified the abominable Fugitive Slave Act of 1850.
In less than nine months, California will hold elections for governor, a US Senate seat, and 53 seats in the House.
So, the rhetoric of “resistance” to Trump is likely to become even more heated – and the courts are likely to find themselves ever busier sorting out what is and is not legal.
TOKYO – It is too soon to know whether and how the challenge posed by North Korea’s nuclear and missile programs will be resolved.
But it is not too early to consider what that challenge could mean for a part of the world that has in many ways defied history.
The moniker “Asian Miracle” goes some way toward conveying just how extraordinary the last half-century of economic growth in many Asian countries has been.
The first economy to take off was Japan, which, despite a slowdown in recent decades and a relatively small population, remains the world’s third-largest economy.
China’s ascent began a bit later, but is no less impressive: the country achieved over three decades of double-digit average GDP growth, making it the world’s second-largest economy today.
India, soon to be the world’s most populous country, has lately been experiencing an impressive 7-8% annual rate of GDP growth.
And the ten members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations averaged some 5% growth in recent years.
But contemporary Asia’s economic miracle rests on a less-discussed strategic miracle: the maintenance of peace and order.
Since the end of the Vietnam War in the mid-1970s, Asia has stood out for its lack of major conflicts within or across borders – an achievement that distinguishes it from Africa, Europe, the Middle East, and even Latin America.
This stability is all the more extraordinary because Asia is home to a large number of unresolved disputes.
When World War II ended in 1945, Japan and Russia did not sign a peace treaty, owing largely to their competing claims over the Southern Kuril Islands, known in Japan as the Northern Territories.
Eight years later, the Korean War also ended without a formal peace treaty, leaving behind a divided and heavily armed peninsula.
Today, competing territorial claims – mostly involving China – continue to stoke tension across Asia.
Japan is embroiled in a dispute with China over the Senkaku (Diaoyu) Islands in the East China Sea.
More than half a dozen other Asian countries disagree vehemently with China’s territorial claims in the South China Sea.
And India is at loggerheads with China over their long-shared Himalayan border.
Despite all of these tensions, Asia has remained largely at peace, partly because no country has wanted to jeopardize economic growth by initiating a conflict.
In leading China’s process of economic “reform and opening-up” from the late 1970s to the early 1990s, Deng explicitly emphasized the importance of a stable external environment to facilitate internal economic development.
The reliance on regional trade ties to support growth and employment has provided yet another incentive to sustain peace.
Because most Asian countries are host to relatively homogenous societies with strong national identities, the chance of civil conflicts erupting and spilling over national borders is relatively low.
Last but certainly not least, America’s strong military presence in Asia – which underpins its robust regional alliance system – has reduced the need for Asian countries to develop large military programs of their own, and has reinforced a status quo that discourages armed adventurism.
These factors have contributed to peace and stability in Asia, but they cannot be taken for granted.
Indeed, they are now coming under increasing pressure – putting the strategic miracle that has facilitated Asia’s economic miracle in jeopardy.
For one thing, China’s economic rise has allowed it to expand its military capabilities.
As China adopts an increasingly assertive foreign policy – exemplified by its border dispute with India and territorial claims in the South China Sea – other countries are increasingly motivated to boost their own military spending.
As that happens, it becomes more likely that a disagreement or incident will escalate into a conflict.
Meanwhile, the US – the only power with the capability to offset China – seems to be retreating from its traditional role in Asia.
Already, US President Donald Trump’s administration has withdrawn his country from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and confronted US allies on their defense spending and persistent trade imbalances.
More generally, the growing unpredictability of US foreign policy could weaken deterrence and prompt allies to take their security into their own hands.
The most immediate cause of potential instability is North Korea, which now poses not just a conventional military threat to South Korea, but also a nuclear threat to all of Asia, as well as to the US.
But, if the US refrains from military action, the results could also be catastrophic, if the North actually does strike.
Even just the threat of such a strike could be destabilizing, if it drives concerned US allies such as South Korea and Japan to increase their military spending and reconsider their non-nuclear postures.
Should any of these scenarios come to pass, the consequences would be far-reaching.
Beyond the human costs, they would threaten the economic prosperity of not only Asia, but the entire world.
A conflict between the US and China, in particular, could poison the single most important bilateral relationship of the twenty-first century.
There is still time for governments to embrace restraint, explore diplomacy, and reconsider policies that threaten to undermine stability.
Unfortunately, we are living in a time of rising nationalism and at times irresponsible leadership.
Add to that inadequate regional political-military arrangements, and it is not at all certain that wisdom will triumph over recklessness, or that Asia’s unique decades-long peace will endure.
LONDON – The time has come for national governments around the world to start issuing their debt in a new form, linked to their countries’ resources.
GDP-linked bonds, with coupons and principal that rise and fall in proportion to the issuing country’s GDP, promise to solve many fundamental problems that governments face when their countries’ economies falter.
And, once GDP-linked bonds are issued by a variety of countries, investors will be attracted by the prospect of high returns when some of these countries do very well.
Although issues may start out small, they will be very important from the outset.
The capitalized value of total global GDP is worth far more than the world’s stock markets, and could be valued today in the quadrillions of US dollars.
Now an authoritative open-source online handbook just published by the Centre for Economic Policy Research, Sovereign GDP-Linked Bonds: Rationale and Design, explains how governments can do this.
I co-edited the book with Jonathan D. Ostry of the International Monetary Fund, and James Benford and Mark Joy of the Bank of England.
The book draws on work commissioned by the recent Chinese and German presidencies of the G20, with the collaboration of 20 leading economists, lawyers, and investors.
Its publication carries endorsements from Andy Haldane, Executive Director of Financial Stability of the Bank of England, and Maurice Obstfeld, Economic Counselor and Research Director at the International Monetary Fund.
In my 1993 book Macro Markets, I described the world’s GDPs as the “mother of all markets” and emphasized a form of debt that I called “perpetual claims.”
Governments issue GDP-linked bonds to raise funds, just as corporations issue shares.
By issuing such bonds, governments pledge to pay in proportion to the resources they have, measured by their countries’ GDP.
The price-to-GDP ratio of GDP-linked bonds is essentially analogous to the price-to-earnings ratio of corporate shares.
The difference is that GDP is an order of magnitude larger than corporate profits represented by the stock market.
As Sovereign GDP-Linked Bonds argues, the issuance of GDP-linked bonds will create “fiscal space” – a cushion for exigencies – for some countries.
When government debt payments are fixed in currency terms, as they typically are today, countries get into trouble.
In a financial crisis, they become over-leveraged, unable to borrow more, and forced to take drastic action that may impede recovery from the crisis.
Taxpayers, rather than willing investors, are forced to become the final bearers of risk.
The crises that erupted in countries like Ireland and Greece a decade ago would not have been so severe had their debt been GDP-linked.
And the same is true today: Investors around the world will continue to accept the risk, given the unlimited upside to investing in entire economies.
And they can achieve the ne plus ultra of diversification by holding GDP-linked bonds from around the world.
Financial inventions are as complex as engineering inventions, and many details must be worked out to make things work well.
We have almost no examples of successful GDP-linked bonds for the same reason we did not see laptop computers until the late 1980s.
The new book takes on the design problem, describing a term sheet for the debt.
For example, how will the market deal with governments’ subsequent revisions of their announced GDP statistics?
What will happen if the government somehow fails to produce a GDP number on time?
What is the seniority ranking of GDP-linked bonds relative to other sovereign debt?
How should collective-action clauses be written, and should they extend to the sovereign’s conventional debt?
Should GDP-linked bonds be issued in the national currency or in a reserve currency?
Some worry that governments could manipulate their GDP statistics so that they will have less to pay.
But that is unlikely, because lower GDP would be taken as a sign of the government’s failure.
As Sovereign GDP-Linked Bonds points out, inflation-indexed debt is even more vulnerable to government cheating, because the monetary incentive for the government is to underreport inflation, which is in line with keeping up appearances.
The global economy is improving, but the aftermath of the financial crisis has left behind a mountain of government debt, leaving governments less able to rely on fiscal policy to respond to any new crisis.
It is important to begin establishing GDP-linked debt now, along the lines described in the new book, so that the biggest risks can be managed, and policymakers can focus on maintaining economic stability.
Debt instruments similar to GDP-linked bonds have been tried, but only when it is already too late: as an emergency component of a post-default restructuring process.
Now, countries that are not in crisis have a chance to try the real thing.
The biggest step forward will come when advanced countries issue GDP-linked bonds in relatively normal times.
COPENHAGEN – Thousands of politicians, bureaucrats, and environmental activists have arrived in Copenhagen for the COP15 global climate summit with all the bravado – and self-regard – of a group of commandos who are convinced that they are about to save the world.
And, although the political differences between them remain huge, delegates are nonetheless congratulating themselves for having the answers to global warming.
The blustery language and ostentatious self-confidence that fill the Bella Center here remind me of a similar scene: Kyoto, 1997.
There, world leaders actually signed a legally binding deal to cut carbon emissions – something that will elude the Copenhagen summit-goers.
To be sure, Europe has made some progress towards reducing its carbon-dioxide emissions.
But, of the 15 European Union countries represented at the Kyoto summit, 10 have still not meet the targets agreed there.
In all, we are likely to achieve barely 5% of the promised Kyoto reduction.
To put it another way, let’s say we index 1990 global emissions at 100.
If there were no Kyoto at all, the 2010 level would have been 142.7.
In fact, the actual outcome of Kyoto is likely to be a 2010 level of 142.2 – virtually the same as if we had done nothing at all.
Given 12 years of continuous talks and praise for Kyoto, this is not much of an accomplishment.
The Kyoto Protocol did not fail because any one nation let the rest of the world down.
Whether or not Copenhagen is declared a political victory, that inescapable fact of economic life will once again prevail – and grand promises will once again go unfulfilled.
This is why I advocate abandoning the pointless strategy of trying to make governments promise to cut carbon emissions.
Instead, the world should be focusing its efforts on making non-polluting energy sources cheaper than fossil fuels.
We should be negotiating an international agreement to increase radically spending on green-energy research and development – to a total of 0.2% of global GDP, or $100 billion a year.
Without this kind of concerted effort, alternative technologies simply will not be ready to take up the slack from fossil fuels.
On the first day of the conference, United Nations climate change chief Yvo de Boer declared how optimistic he was about continuing the Kyoto approach: “Almost every day, countries announce new targets or plans of action to cut emissions,” he said.
Either the targets are unachievable or the numbers are fudged.
Japan’s pledge of a 25% reduction in carbon emissions by 2020 sounds incredible – because it is.
China, meanwhile, drew plaudits just before the Copenhagen summit by promising to cut its carbon intensity (the amount of CO2 emitted for each dollar of GDP) over the next ten years to just 40-45% of its level in 2005.
Based on figures from the International Energy Agency , China was already expected to reduce its carbon intensity by 40% without any new policies.
As its economy develops, China will inevitably shift to less carbon-intensive industries.
In other words, China took what was universally expected to happen and, with some creative spin, dressed it up as a new and ambitious policy initiative.
Consider how quick the Copenhagen delegates were to dismiss the scandal now known as “Climategate” – the outcry over the release of thousands of disturbing emails and other documents hacked from the computers of a prestigious British climate-research center.
Climategate exposed a side of the scientific community most people never get to see.
What the stolen emails revealed was a group of the world’s most influential climatologists arguing, brainstorming, and plotting together to enforce what amounts to a party line on climate change.
Data that didn’t support their assumptions about global warming were fudged.
Experts who disagreed with their conclusions were denigrated as “idiots” and “garbage.”
Peer-reviewed journals that dared to publish contrarian articles were threatened with boycotts.
Dissent was stifled, facts were suppressed, scrutiny was blocked, and the free flow of information was choked off.
Predictably, the text of the more than 3,000 purloined emails have been seized on by skeptics of man-made climate change as “proof” that global warming is nothing more than a hoax cooked up by a bunch of pointy-headed intellectuals.
Global warming is not a hoax, but at a time when opinion polls reveal rising public skepticism about climate change, this unsavory glimpse of scientists trying to cook the data could be just the excuse too many people are waiting for to tune it all out.
What seems to have motivated the scientists involved in Climategate was the arrogant belief that that the way to save the world was to conceal or misrepresent ambiguous and contradictory findings about global warming that might “confuse” the public.
So, too, is continuing to embrace a response to global warming that has failed for nearly two decades.
Instead of papering over the flaws in the Kyoto approach and pretending that grand promises translate into real action, we need to acknowledge that saving the world requires a smarter strategy than the one being pursued so dogmatically in Copenhagen.
NEW DELHI – As the sand-storm season in Libya gathers power and pace, the bright early colors of the Arab spring are fading alongside the hopes and promise of change for peoples too long suppressed by despotic and inert governments.
Despite more than three months of aerial attacks on Colonel Muammar el-Qaddafi’s troops, a stalemate of sorts seems to have set in.
The hopes that animated the intervention in Libya always seemed a bit out of place in a landscape steeped in ancient memories.
Writing recently in The New York Review of Books about the coastal Libyan city of Derna, Nicholas Pelham described how between “the turquoise Mediterranean and the Green Mountains lie the ruins of the forums and churches Byzantium left behind.”
In Derna’s city center, “you see the better-preserved white-domed shrines to Sheikh Zubeir ibn Qays and 76 other companions of the Prophet Muhammed,” all slaughtered here by a Byzantine force in Hijri 69 (690 AD).
This casual fact assumes significance when one considers that Derna sent more teenage volunteers per capita than any other city in the Maghreb to wage jihad in Iraq and Afghanistan.
And yet Derna’s citizens were among the first to rejoice when American and NATO sorties were launched to defend the rebel-held city of Benghazi and to attack Qaddafi in his lair in Tripoli.
Such jubilation appeared to express the possibility of freedom from the tyranny of a dictatorship frozen in time and place.
But now, amid mounting concern that Islamist radicalism lies just beneath the surface of the Libyan rebellion, all bets are off.
That such complications are only now being discussed openly suggests that seriously defective policymaking was at the heart of the decision to intervene.
Indeed, not only has the effectiveness of that intervention been almost a daily disappointment to the Libyan rebels, who expected far more direct military aid from the United States and the West, but it has also exposed long-simmering resentments in the US about the state of the NATO alliance.
That is why US Secretary of Defense Robert Gates has, far more explicitly than any of his predecessors, voiced frustration and more than a hint of anger at America’s NATO allies.
“While all NATO countries voted to intervene in Libya,” he reminded them recently, “most [have] chosen not to participate in the actual fighting.”
And even those that did soon ran short of ammunition, forcing an exasperated America to step into the breach yet again.
Understandably, Gates finds this situation, in which the US accounts for 75% of NATO’s military spending, completely “unacceptable.”
Moreover, he believes that it is “unsustainable,” and that if the situation is not rectified, NATO faces a “dismal” future.
Meanwhile, as Gates was berating the NATO allies, US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton was bluntly warning African leaders that “authoritarian governments” ruled by “aging despots” were “no longer acceptable.”
They must, therefore, “end their lingering relations with Qaddafi.”
For his part, Qaddafi has increasingly sought to demonstrate that the intervention is going nowhere, even brazenly appearing to engage in a chess match with the Russian head of FIDE, the world chess association.
And his troops continue to take the offensive, despite the introduction by Britain and France of helicopter gunships into the battle.
For America and the West, other dangers are surfacing as the Libyan intervention flounders.
The growing violence in Syria, for example, poses truly awkward questions: Can the West, after intervening to prevent a bloodbath in Benghazi, continue to do nothing as massacres take place throughout the country?
To let the Syrian cauldron boil is wrenching, but to intervene appears utterly impractical.
Liberal interventionism, once again, seems undermined by its (perhaps inevitably) uneven application.
The 20-year-old notion, born of Cold War triumph, that Western military force could impose order wherever and whenever it wished, has become untenable.
Once again, the consequences of such interventions have shown themselves to be more serious and complex than anyone could have imagined, much less would have intended.
Indeed, reflect for a moment on this conundrum: to ignore the bloodshed in Syria is to give tacit recognition to Iran’s regional influence.
That lack of resolve invariably diminishes Saudi Arabia’s prestige and raises even more questions within the Kingdom about the reliability of US protection – hence further eroding America’s regional position.
The emergence of a neo-Ottoman Turkey under Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, asserting itself in the lands of the former Ottoman Empire, attests to America’s diminished regional prestige.
It should surprise no one that liberal intervention and the age of America as the lone superpower are drawing to a close simultaneously.
But without these liberal interventions as an animating force, what is NATO’s relevance nowadays?
Pug Ismay’s pithy bon mot that NATO’s purpose was “to keep Russia out, America in, and Germany down” no longer suffices.
America’s ability to reaffirm its centrality in global affairs depends on the answer.
LONDON – With Crimea voting for secession, the upheaval in Ukraine is fueling an increasingly charged atmosphere between Russia and the tandem of the United States and the European Union.
Are American and European leaders being cast in a Russian remake of the 1938 Sudeten crisis?
Immediately after Nazi Germany’s annexation of Austria, Adolf Hitler turned his attention to the ethnic Germans living in Czechoslovakia’s Sudetenland.
First, he demanded the Sudetenland’s cession to Germany, gaining relatively easy agreement from British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain and his French counterpart Édouard Daladier.
Hitler then immediately raised his demands to include German military occupation of the area.
Deeming the issue “a quarrel in a faraway country between people of whom we know nothing,” and thus not worth defying Hitler over, Chamberlain and Daladier accepted the occupation by signing the Munich Agreement.
In doing so, they strengthened Germany considerably and emboldened Hitler – with catastrophic consequences.
To be sure, Russian President Vladimir Putin is not Hitler, Russia is not Nazi Germany (or the Soviet Union, for that matter), and the world does not face the same apocalyptic scenario that unfolded in 1939.
Nonetheless, there are some important parallels between the Sudeten and Crimean crises.
Russians comprise nearly 60% of Crimea’s two million inhabitants, and many are more closely connected to their “mother” country than to Ukraine.
Likewise, the three million Sudeten Germans felt much greater loyalty to Germany than to Czechoslovakia, and an overwhelming majority embraced their incorporation into the Third Reich.
Indeed, Putin’s pretext for occupation and annexation – to protect the local population – is the same as Hitler’s.
Until recently, Putin showed little interest in Crimean affairs, beyond renewing the lease on the Black Sea Fleet’s base in Sevastopol.
But, since the Ukrainian revolution, the local Russian population’s alleged vulnerability to “fascists” has become an emblematic issue – and an excuse for Russian military intervention.
Hitler employed a similar pretext in demanding the Sudetenland’s transfer from Czechoslovakia.
Putin has something else in common with Hitler: the view that the country he is occupying is somehow “unnatural.”
Although Putin has not formally challenged Ukraine’s independence, he has never hidden his view that it is not a “real country,” referring to it as part of the “Russian world.”
Similarly, for Hitler, Czechoslovakia was an unnatural conglomeration of disparate nations and regions.
Six months after hiving off the Sudetenland, he abrogated the Munich Agreement by occupying all of Bohemia and Moravia and turning the Czech lands into a German protectorate, while installing a puppet regime in a nominally independent Slovakia.
If Putin has similar designs, he would begin with Crimea’s annexation – now seemingly a done deal – followed by a direct military presence in eastern Ukraine (where Russian troops are massing at the border), and possibly some kind of partition in the longer term.
Of course, like Hitler, Putin is not concerned only – or even especially – with the occupied area.
Putin has long used national resurgence – in particular, the idea of Russia as an independent global actor with its own “world” – to legitimize his rule.
According to this vision, Ukraine must be strategically aligned with Russia, and its sovereignty must be limited.
For his part, Hitler considered an independent, democratic Czechoslovakia to be a security threat, while eyeing its considerable industrial assets.
But the Sudetenland’s annexation was, first and foremost, aimed at helping to restore Germany’s “great power” status.
There are also striking similarities between Western leaders’ responses to the two crises – namely, their reluctance to take decisive action.
Indeed, they seem unwilling to back up their warnings of “costs” and “consequences” with meaningful measures like asset freezes, trade sanctions, and travel restrictions – reinforcing Putin’s belief that they will continue to choose their relationships with Russia over protecting Ukraine’s territorial integrity.
This timidity recalls British and French policy in 1938, when the Sudetenland – and later Czechoslovakia – was sacrificed for a short-lived “peace in our time.”
What lessons can be drawn from the comparison between the Crimean and Sudeten crises?
First, any dialogue with Putin will be fruitless, unless Western leaders take a decisive approach that is shaped by concrete objectives, not bogus “strategic partnerships.”
Conversely, name-calling – like US President Barack Obama’s accusation that Russia is “on the wrong side of history” – is pointless.
The West should stop reacting to Putin with “shock and awe” – shock that he can act with such seeming impunity, and awe at his perceived tactical brilliance.
Europe and the US have vastly greater influence and resources than Russia, with its atrophied political system and exhausted economic model.
What they lack is the willingness to accept the economic and political costs of defending the values that they claim to uphold.
Finally, Western leaders must recognize that appeasement cannot ensure peace and stability in Europe – not even under the fig leaf of “engagement.”
When dealing with a leader whose credo is defined by the notion that “the weak get beaten,” Western governments must demonstrate their resolve, without sacrificing flexibility.
Only on this basis can the crisis in Ukraine be addressed without fundamentally compromising transatlantic security.
NAIROBI – The G-20 summit in Toronto offers an opportunity for a long, hard look at how green investments are assisting economic recovery and job growth in many countries, while generating environmental gains as well, including on climate change.
China, which channeled around one-third of its stimulus package into environmental sectors, has seen its GDP rise sharply, and employment in renewable energies such as solar has climbed to more than 1.5 million, with 300,000 workers added in 2009 alone.
Spain’s unemployment rate is high, but it would undoubtedly be higher without its policy to foster wind power and other clean-tech sectors, in which a half-million jobs have been created.
South Korea has invested well over 80% of its stimulus in areas ranging from sustainable transport and low-emission vehicles to energy-efficient buildings.
This has now been backed up with a five-year green-growth plan aimed at cutting carbon dependency while producing 1.8 million jobs.
India’s National Rural Employment Guarantee Act is assisting to repair and restore a range of rural infrastructure, critical for the livelihoods of the poor, including water-storage networks in some of the poorest parts of the country, such as Andhra Pradesh.
It is delivering improved water security, a 25% increase in wages for agricultural workers, and more than 3.5 billion days of work, with the program as a whole reaching 30 million families per year on average.
The city of São Paulo, which represents around one-third of Brazil’s economy, is embarking on a Green Economy strategy that ranges from transport to greener buildings.
While a transition to a low-carbon, resource-efficient economy is gaining traction globally, some claim either that it is merely a glossy repackaging of the sustainable-development agenda, or, worse, a plot to constrain rather than liberate growth in developing and least-developed countries.
In either case, it is an agenda favored by developed or rapidly emerging countries, which poorer economies cannot afford.
In advance of the G-20, we have assembled some key case studies – part of a major Green Economy report to be published later in the year.
In Kenya, we found that a new green-energy policy, including a feed-in tariff and 15-year power-purchase agreement, is catalyzing an initial target of 500 megawatts of geothermal, wind, and bio-fuel power, and a rise of more than 40% in the country’s installed capacity.
In Uganda, policies to promote organic agriculture have generated 200,000 certified farmers and strong export growth, from under $4 million in 2003 to nearly $23 million now.
And in Thailand, market mechanisms, backed by ambitious targets, are helping the country produce businesses that are regional leaders in waste recycling, including operations now in Laos and Malaysia, while generating thousands of jobs.
Over the past two years, the Green Economy has gone from theory to practice.
It is now one of the two major themes as governments prepare for the Rio+20 conference in Brazil in 2012.
The inherent logic offers, perhaps for the first time, a sustainable growth paradigm that is suited to developing and developed countries alike.
New ideas and policies, especially when they challenge the status quo, will always have their critics.
But, as multiple case studies demonstrate, many developing economies are making up their own minds.
The Green Economy is not a luxury, but a clear imperative on a planet of six billion people – and nine billion by 2050.The financial and economic crisis has given it wings.
How far it will fly will depend on smart policies by national governments in developed and developing countries, and on forward-looking policies by regional development banks, the World Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and bilateral development finance by OECD countries.
The G-20 summit in Toronto has the opportunity, if not the responsibility, to enable this transition by taking a leadership role in support of developing economies’ aspirations.
Its leaders should re-affirm their commitment to embed sustainability in the global economic recovery, and their recognition of the Green Economy’s power to create a fundamentally different development path for all countries.
SEOUL – The indictment of Lee Jae-yong, the heir apparent at Samsung, is but the latest explosive development in the political scandal that has been rocking South Korea.
Already, the National Assembly voted to impeach President Park Geun-hye, the daughter of former president Park Chung-hee, on December 9.
Depending on its decision, a presidential election may be held in the next few months.
But, as Lee’s indictment demonstrates, more than the presidency is at stake in this crisis.
At the heart of the scandal is the reciprocal relationship between politicians and the chaebols, South Korea’s giant family-owned conglomerates.
If the government takes this opportunity to transform the economy’s chaebol-dominated structure, it would reshape the country’s economic future as well – for the better.
Park is accused of using her political influence to benefit her longtime confidante, Choi Soon-sil, who is charged with forcing the chaebols to funnel about 80 billion Korean won ($70 million) into two nonprofit cultural foundations that she effectively controlled.
She is also suspected of interfering in various state affairs, including ministerial appointments and state visits, despite having no official position.
Most administrations have extracted money from the chaebols, often with the help of prosecutors and the tax authorities.
In exchange for that money, which is used to finance costly state projects or even political campaigns, the chaebols gain favors, such as cheap bank loans or preferential regulations.
This reciprocal relationship has existed since the start of South Korea’s economic transformation in the 1960s.
The country’s rapid progress is attributed to strong manufacturing exports, carried out by firms that were able to compete in global markets only with the help of government incentives.
Park’s father, who led South Korea from 1961 until his assassination in 1979, worked closely with the chaebols, helping them first to build comparative advantages in labor-intensive manufacturing and then to progress to more capital-intensive industries, including automobiles, shipbuilding, and chemicals.
Today, the chaebols produce almost two-thirds of South Korea’s exports – no small feat, in the world’s sixth-largest exporting country.
Samsung Electronics is the largest chaebol, and accounts for 20% of total exports.
Ranking 13th on the Fortune 2016 Global 500, Samsung’s market capitalization comprises one-fifth of the South Korean stock market.
Beyond government support, the chaebols’ ownership and governance structure has contributed to their success.
With the founding families in charge, chaebols’ top management can focus on a long-term vision, instead of short-term profits, and can mobilize resources swiftly.
The efficiency of this model is apparent in the chaebols’ success as “fast followers” of top US and Japanese firms.
Yet the chaebols’ hierarchical management structure is often too rigid to correct bad decisions.
Many conglomerates went bankrupt during the 1997 Asian financial crisis, having made excessive and unprofitable investments.
Moreover, the chaebols’ ownership is often opaque, with webs of cross-shareholdings allowing founding families to exercise controlling power, despite holding only a small portion of equity.
The Lee family has less than 5% direct ownership of Samsung Electronics, but holds a 31.1% stake in Samsung C&T, the group’s de facto holding company, which owns a 4.3% stake in Samsung Electronics and a 19.3% stake in Samsung Life Insurance.
Samsung Life Insurance, in turn, has a 7.3% stake in Samsung Electronics, which indirectly invests in Samsung C&T and Samsung Life Insurance.
This type of ownership structure can be particularly problematic during transfers of ownership to new generations.
As with any dynasty, no one is ever sure that the heir apparent is capable of doing the job.
At a time of strong and growing market competition, he must provide the kind of visionary leadership that characterized his father and grandfather, the company’s pioneering founder, who transformed a small local trading company into a global semiconductor and smartphone powerhouse.
Like the rest of the chaebols, Samsung risks losing ground in global markets, owing to the narrowing technology gap with China.
Though South Korea is still ahead of China in high-tech branches like memory chips and automobiles, its lead is diminishing in many major industries, such as steel, ships, petrochemicals, and electronics.
In emerging markets, Samsung Electronics has already lost market share to Chinese smartphone makers such as Huawei and OPPO.
It is in this high-pressure context that, last year, Moon Hyung-pyo, South Korea’s then-health and welfare minister, allegedly pressured the National Pension Service to back a controversial merger of two Samsung group affiliates that was essential to ensure a smooth transfer of managerial control to Lee.
Moon, who then became chair of the NPS, has now been arrested for that move.
He is charged with donating to Choi’s two foundations, and of bankrolling Choi’s daughter, in exchange for the support he received.
(The judge ruled that there was insufficient reason to issue the requested arrest warrant.)
While the government makes deals with the chaebols, start-ups and small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs) are struggling to make their way into the market.
And labor productivity in the services sector is 45% that of the manufacturing sector – just half the OECD average.
To create a healthier business climate for innovative small firms and venture startups, the chaebols’ dominance must end.
South Korea’s leaders must implement stronger regulations to prevent illegal transactions and unfair practices, including collusion between chaebols and government officials.
They should also strengthen the rights of minority shareholders and outside directors to prevent expropriation by founding families.
There was a time when what was good for the chaebols was good for South Korea.
But times have changed, and the chaebol system is now doing more harm than good.
With Park’s impeachment, South Korea has gained an ideal opportunity to leave behind her father’s legacy as well.
LONDON – In late 1979, I began work on my PhD thesis, an empirical investigation of the OPEC surplus and its disposal.
It was the end of a decade in which oil prices had undergone two dramatic increases, and most of the various geniuses of the day were confidently predicting that they would continue to soar, from under $40 per barrel – a historic high at that time – to above $100.
By the time I finished my research in 1982, the price of oil had begun what would become a 20-year plunge.
I used to joke that the most important thing I learned from my research was never to attempt to forecast the price of oil.
As 2014 comes to a close, the price of oil has just crossed the $100 threshold again – this time headed down.
Over the past 33 years, I have had plenty of opportunity to study both oil prices and foreign exchange rates, including overseeing a research department of talented people trying to predict their movements.
The experience has left me with a good deal of skepticism – not to mention bruises.
But I do believe that it is possible to make a broad prediction as to where oil prices are headed.
Over the course of my career, I have tried to determine whether there is such a thing as an equilibrium oil price.
I have spent many hours trying to guide, cajole, and beg my energy analysts to create a model that might identify it, just as we have for currencies, bond yields, and equities.
I have also discussed the idea with industry experts, most of whom believe that one exists, but that it moves around a lot, because it is greatly influenced by the marginal cost of oil production – itself an unstable variable.
My conclusion is that a good indication of this moving equilibrium does exist: the five-year forward oil price, or the amount paid for guaranteed delivery of oil five years from now.
In my ongoing quest to become better at forecasting, I began, a few years ago, to pay attention to the five-year forward oil price as it compares to the Brent crude oil spot price, the price of a barrel of oil today.
I suspect that the five-year forward price is much less influenced by speculation in the oil market than the spot price, and more representative of true commercial needs.
So when the five-year price starts moving in a different direction than the spot price, I take notice.
In 2011, after both prices had recovered from the collapse induced by the 2008 credit crisis, the five-year price started to come down gradually, while the spot price continued to surge for a while.
This jibed with what I had identified as two big factors fundamentally driving the price of oil: the early days of the exploitation of shale oil and gas in the United States, and the shift in China’s economic focus from quantity to quality, which implied that the Chinese economy would no longer be consuming energy at the frenetic rate it had been.
I concluded that there was a fair chance that oil prices were peaking and that before too long spot prices would reverse and start to decline.
I thought it was probably the beginning of a move back down to $80 per barrel – precisely where the price has landed at the end of 2014.
I no longer make predictions for a living, but I do know one thing: Oil prices will either rise or fall.
I recently read an article that suggested that, if oil prices remain at recent levels, US production of shale oil and gas next year could be 10% below recent projections.
That seems plausible; and, given how important shale oil and gas has become to America’s economic recovery, it also seems like something that US policymakers would be eager to avoid.
Oil prices may not start rising in the coming months, but, as 2014 comes to a close, forces that will eventually halt their decline are beginning to appear.
The drop in the spot price of oil has taken it significantly below the five-year forward price, which remains close to $80 per barrel.
My hunch for 2015 is that oil prices may continue to drop in the short term; unlike in the past four years, however, they are likely to finish the year higher than they were when it began.
LONDON – Osama bin Laden’s death in his Pakistani hiding place is like the removal of a tumor from the Muslim world.
But aggressive follow-up therapy will be required to prevent the remaining Al Qaeda cells from metastasizing by acquiring more adherents who believe in violence to achieve the 'purification' and empowerment of Islam.
Fortunately, Bin Laden’s death comes at the very moment when much of the Islamic world is being convulsed by the treatment that Bin Laden’s brand of fanaticism requires: the Arab Spring, with its demands for democratic empowerment (and the absence of demands, at least so far, for the type of Islamic rule that Al Qaeda sought to impose).
But can the nascent democracies being built in Egypt and Tunisia, and sought in Bahrain, Libya, Syria, Yemen, and elsewhere, see off the threats posed by Islamic extremists?
In particular, can it defeat the Salafi/Wahhabi thought that has long nurtured Osama bin Laden and his ilk, and which remains the professed and protected ideology of Saudi Arabia?
The fact is that before the US operation to kill Bin Laden, Al Qaeda’s symbolic head, the emerging democratic Arab revolutions had already, in just a few short months, done as much to marginalize and weaken his terrorist movement in the Islamic world as the war on terror had achieved in a decade.
Those revolutions, whatever their ultimate outcome, have exposed the philosophy and behavior of Bin Laden and his followers as not only illegitimate and inhumane, but actually inept at achieving better conditions for ordinary Muslims.
What millions of Arabs were saying as they stood united in peaceful protest was that their way of achieving Arab and Islamic dignity is far less costly in human terms.
More importantly, their way will ultimately achieve the type of dignity that people really want, as opposed to the unending wars of terror to rebuild the caliphate that Bin Laden promised.
After all, the protesters of the Arab Spring did not need to use – and abuse – Islam to achieve their ends.
They did not wait for God to change their condition, but took the initiative by peacefully confronting their oppressors.
The Arab revolutions mark the emergence of a pluralist, post-Islamist banner for the faithful.
Indeed, the only people to introduce religion into the protests have been rulers, such as those in Bahrain, Yemen, Libya, and Syria, who have tried to use fear of the Shia or Sunni “other” to continue to divide and misrule their societies.
Now that the US has eradicated Bin Laden’s physical presence, it needs to stop delaying the rest of the therapeutic process.
For the US has been selectively – and short-sightedly – irradiating only parts of the cancer that Al Qaeda represents, while leaving the malignant growth of Saudi Wahabism and Salafism untouched.
Indeed, despite the decade of the West’s war on terror, and Saudi Arabia’s longer-term alliance with the US, the Kingdom’s Wahhabi religious establishment has continued to bankroll Islamic extremist ideologies around the world.
Bin Laden, born, raised, and educated in Saudi Arabia, is a product of this pervasive ideology.
He was no religious innovator; he was a product of Wahhabism, and later was exported by the Wahhabi regime as a jihadist.
During the 1980’s, Saudi Arabia spent $75 billion for the propagation of Wahhabism, funding schools, mosques, and charities throughout the Islamic world, from Pakistan to Afghanistan, Yemen, Algeria, and beyond.
The Saudis continued such programs after the terror attacks of September 11, 2001, and even after they discovered that “the Call” is uncontrollable, owing to the technologies of globalization.
Not surprisingly, the creation of a transnational Islamic political movement, boosted by thousands of underground jihadi Web sites, has blown back into the Kingdom.
Like the hijackers of 9/11, who were also Saudi/Wahhabi ideological exports (15 of the 19 men who carried out those terror attacks were chosen by Bin Laden because they shared the same Saudi descent and education as he), Saudi Arabia’s reserve army of potential terrorists remains, because the Wahhabi factory of fanatical ideas remains intact.
So the real battle has not been with Bin Laden, but with that Saudi state-supported ideology factory.
Bin Laden merely reflected the entrenched violence of the Kingdom’s official ideology.
Bin Laden’s eradication may strip some dictators, from Libya’s Muammar el-Qaddafi to Yemen’s Ali Abdallah Saleh, of the main justification they have used for their decades of repression.
But the US knows perfectly well that Al Qaeda is an enemy of convenience for Saleh and other American allies in the region, and that in many cases, terrorism has been used as a pretext to repress reform.
Indeed, now the US is encouraging repression of the Arab Spring in Yemen and Bahrain, where official security forces routinely kill peaceful protesters calling for democracy and human rights.
Indeed, Bin Laden’s death should open the international community’s eyes to the source of his movement: repressive Arab regimes and their extremist ideologies.
WASHINGTON, DC – In the three years since the global financial crisis erupted, two dominant views of what went wrong have emerged.
It is crucial that we understand each, because their implications for policymakers – and thus for the future health and stability of the global economy – could not be greater.
The first view is that governments simply lost control of the situation, either through incompetence or because politicians were pursuing their own agendas.
This is the view heard most frequently from the political right – for example, from people who think that the main problem in the run-up to the financial meltdown of 2008 was government housing policies.
In the United States, among the candidates still competing for the Republican Party’s nomination to challenge Barack Obama in November’s presidential election, Ron Paul stands out for arguing consistently that government is the problem, not the answer, with regard to banking.
If the government were removed more fully from the financial sector (including abolishing the Federal Reserve), he argues, the economy would function better.
The second view is that the financial sector lobbied long and hard for deregulation in recent decades, and spent a great deal of time and money persuading politicians that it constituted the safe and modern approach to banking.
According to this view, government policies did not fail; on the contrary, they operated exactly as intended – and as bought and paid for.
If this view is correct, the kind of policy prescription recommended by Ron Paul is less appealing.
Unless you think that a modern financial sector really can operate with absolutely no regulation of any kind (including, presumably, the rules for banks that come with deposit insurance), the real problem is not government officials’ policy preferences, but what financial-sector lobbyists are able to persuade officials to do.
Fresh evidence supporting the second view is now available in the form of a recent study by Deniz Igan and Prachi Mishra of the International Monetary Fund.
In “Three’s Company: Wall Street, Capitol Hill, and K Street,” the authors look at the data – lots of it – on lobbying by financial-sector companies in the US.
Legislators, of course, have different preferences about what kinds of laws to support, which can make it hard to study mechanisms of political influence precisely.
But Igan and Mishra approach the problem in a clever way – they look for instances when elected officials switched their position on legislative proposals that surfaced more than once.
In addition to analyzing information about lobbying expenditures, the authors map out the network connections of lobbyists (known collectively as “K Street,” because so many have their Washington offices there) and legislators.
For example, lobbyists were often previously employed by legislators on their staffs.
The results are simply staggering – although surely not a surprise to professional lobbyists.
And “whether any of the lobbyists working on a bill also worked for a legislator in the past sways the stance on that bill in favor of deregulation.”
It is deregulation, of course, that financial firms want – fewer rules and less oversight of any kind.
And it really is all about whom you know, and how you know them.
In particular, your value as a lobbyist seems to depend very highly on whom you worked with in the past.
Igan and Mishra find “spending an extra dollar is almost twice as effective in switching a legislator’s position if the lobbyist is connected to the legislator compared to the case where the lobbyist is unconnected.”
The revolving door between Congress and lobbying firms appears to have been central to how the financial sector became deregulated, which effectively allowed excessive risk-taking in the run-up to the crisis.
In another paper, Igan and Mishra, working with Thierry Tressel, found that firms taking more risks before 2008 were also engaged in more lobbying.
Essentially, financial firms have been buying the right to take on more risk.
When things go well, executives in these firms get the upside – mostly in terms of immediate compensation, because few executives are compensated on the basis of risk-adjusted returns.
That means that when the risks materialize and the firms suffer losses, the costs fall on taxpayers.
Ron Paul is right to point to imbalances of power and massive distortions within the financial sector.
He is also correct that many government policies favor relatively few big firms – and favor them in a way that encourages excessive and dangerous risk-taking.
But Paul and others are wrong to argue that the government is the ultimate cause of all financial evil.
Big financial firms can more readily buy the necessary political protection (in the form of deregulation), enabling them to become even bigger and more dangerous.
ABIDJAN, CÔTE D’IVOIRE – If you’re ever shopping for a pair of jeans in an American mall, check the label.
If it was made in, say, Lesotho – a tiny mountainous country surrounded by South Africa, with a population of around two million – you probably have the the African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) to thank for it.
The AGOA, which was implemented in 2000, allows more than 6,400 products from eligible sub-Saharan African countries to enter the United States market duty-free.
According to Lesotho’s National AGOA Strategy, the country’s annual garment exports to the US increased from about $129 million in 2001 to $330 million in 2015, representing 80% of total external demand for the country’s textiles and garments.
With 44,000 employees, Lesotho’s garment industry is now the country’s largest private-sector employer.
The AGOA has underpinned other “Made in Africa” success stories, too.
Some may complain that the AGOA favors petroleum products, but the figures speak for themselves.
According to the 2016 AGOA report, released by the Office of the US Trade Representative, non-oil exports to the US under AGOA nearly tripled, from $1.4 billion in 2001 to $4.1 billion in 2015.
Automobiles from South Africa and apparel from Kenya, Lesotho, Mauritius, and Swaziland were the leading exports.
The AGOA has also been criticized for excluding some agricultural products, for which Africans have a comparative advantage.
The products that are not excluded face complex health and safety regulations, further hampering Africans’ ability to export agricultural products to the US.
But bold, export-ready African countries have managed to overcome these hurdles.
Namibia, for example, recently became the first African country to gain eligibility to export boneless (not ground) raw beef products to the US.
There is no doubt that the AGOA has created important opportunities for the countries involved.
Having been extended for another decade last year, it is now set to remain in force until 2025.
In other words, countries have just nine years left to ensure that the industries that have grown under the AGOA not only survive, retaining the thousands of jobs that have been created, but continue to grow.
Given that Africa now accounts for just 1% of America’s $350 billion textile and apparel market, there is plenty of room for expansion.
If the US eventually ratifies the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, countries like Vietnam could erode Africa’s share of the US market in textiles and apparel.
The key to success for African countries will be to strengthen the skills base and build competitive industries in the textile and apparel sector.
A country that could emerge as a key player is Ethiopia, which for the first time was named as a possible global sourcing destination in a 2015 McKinsey survey of 40 global chief procurement officers.
The challenge for Ethiopia – and for other African countries – is to raise its status from sourcing option to business priority.
To do so, countries should take the invaluable lessons provided by the AGOA to stimulate their export industries’ growth and seize market share not just in the US, but also in other economies, including within Africa.
In fact, the AGOA has helped enhance intra-African trade by enabling producers in different countries to create new, cross-border value chains that benefit all.
Botswana, for example, now exports leather to South Africa, where it is processed into upholstery for luxury cars and exported to the US.
The African Development Bank also has a role to play, particularly in infrastructure development.
Here, the AfDB’s Industrialize Africa strategy, which emphasizes regional value chains, will be particularly valuable, as it recognizes the opportunities that industries in one country can provide to those in neighboring economies.
At the same time, the AfDB must continue working to help meet demand for trade finance in Africa, currently estimated at $120 billion, with a focus on export-oriented small and medium-size enterprises (SMEs).
The AfDB’s Trade Finance Program, established in February 2013, has so far supported more than 85 domestic banks in 27 African countries, catalyzing approximately $3.4 billion in trade in vital sectors such as agriculture, manufacturing and construction, and energy.
At last month’s Ministerial AGOA Forum, African trade ministers recognized the urgent need to plan ahead, committing to the creation of a task force to outline strategies for US-Africa trade and investment relations beyond 2025.
But the clock is ticking, and Africa’s AGOA privileges will soon be eliminated.
NEW YORK – The times we live in are often most clearly reflected in the mirror of art.
But two recent films, Jia Zhangke’s A Touch of Sin, made in China in 2013, and Andrey Zvyagintsev’s Leviathan, made in Russia in 2014, reveal the social and political landscapes of these countries more precisely than anything I have seen in print.
Jia’s movie is episodic; four loosely linked stories about lone acts of extreme violence, mostly culled from contemporary newspaper stories.
Leviathan is about a decent man whose life is ruined by the mayor of his town in collusion with the Russian Orthodox Church and a corrupt judiciary.
The dark skies over the northern Russian coast in Leviathan look ravishing, and Jia even manages to make the concrete and glass jungle of Shenzhen, the monster city between Guangzhou and Hong Kong, look gorgeous.
The other thing both films share is a fascination with mythical stories, the Book of Job in Leviathan, and martial-arts fiction in A Touch of Sin.
In the first episode of A Touch of Sin, the local boss has become a private-plane-owning billionaire by stripping and selling all of his region’s collective assets.
Everything in this new China – where the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) still rules, but the ideas of Karl Marx are as dead as they are in Russia – is for sale, even the trappings of its Maoist past.
In one scene, we see prostitutes in a nightclub titillating overseas Chinese businessmen by parading up and down in sexy People’s Liberation Army uniforms.
The story of Leviathan focuses on the house built by a simple mechanic named Nikolay.
He is robbed of his property by the corrupt mayor, who is paid by the Orthodox Church for the right to build a new church on Nikolay’s land.
Nikolay is disposed of by having him framed for his wife’s murder and tried by a crooked court.
Property, construction, and land are the common currencies of power in mafia societies – in China and Russia no less than in Sicily.
One reason China has been transformed into a gigantic building site, with huge new cities emerging almost overnight, is that this drives a red-hot and highly corrupt economy, ruled by a Leninist party that has monetized political power by asset-stripping and construction.
It is irrelevant that President Vladimir Putin’s United Russia Party, unlike the CCP, makes no claim to any form of Marxist ideology.
The way both governments operate is quite similar: party bosses, tycoons, and corrupt bureaucrats divide the spoils, while promoting chauvinism and “traditional values” – whether those of the Orthodox Church or Confucianism.
Judges are bought or intimidated to ensure that bosses remain above the law.
Putin’s party was elected in Russia, as was President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan’s Justice and Development Party in Turkey, Prime Minister Viktor Orbán’s Fidesz in Hungary, and President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi’s military regime in Egypt.
This political model is now seen as a serious rival to American-style liberal democracy, and perhaps it is.
But during the Cold War, authoritarian capitalism, usually under military regimes, was anti-Communist and very much on America’s side.
South Korea’s strongman, Park Chung-hee, current President Park Geun-hye’s father, was in many ways a pioneer of the type of society that we now see in China and Russia.
Because the dictatorships in America’s client states ended more or less when the Cold War did, and were replaced by liberal democracies, many were lulled into the comforting belief that liberal democracy and capitalism would naturally – even inevitably – come together everywhere.
Orbán claimed earlier this year that liberal democracy was no longer a viable model.
He cited China and Russia as more successful countries, not for ideological reasons, but because he thinks that they are more competitive in today’s world.
The Russian economy is far too dependent on oil and other natural resources, and the legitimacy of China’s one-party system could collapse quickly in an economic crisis.
The way that illiberal regimes use the law for their own ends will not inspire the confidence of investors, either – at least not in the long run.
And yet, for now, the societies depicted so acidly in Leviathan and A Touch of Sin continue to look good in the eyes of many people who are disillusioned with Europe’s economic stagnation and America’s political dysfunction.
Western businessmen, artists, architects, and others who need large amounts of money for expensive projects enjoy working with authoritarian regimes that “get things done.”
Illiberal thinkers on the far right and left admire strongmen who stand up to America.
A Touch of Sin has been shown to great acclaim all over the world, but not in China.
Leviathan, by contrast, has been submitted as the official Russian entry for the Oscars.
His followers in Russia are unlikely to see, let alone be influenced by, an art film, and this sliver of Russian free expression might just persuade foreigners that there is still some liberalism left in Putin’s authoritarian democracy – at least until that, too, ends up as a shattered illusion.
MANILA – A knitting factory in Bangladesh brings together the past, present, and future.
This building might seem like an anachronism, given the accepted wisdom that robots will replace humans in textiles and many other industries.
But it is actually a savvy response to how the Fourth Industrial Revolution will likely play out in Asia.
As is the case elsewhere, technological advances are rapidly transforming industries and economies, by blurring the boundaries between the physical, digital, and biological worlds.
And yet much of Asia isn’t ready for robots, for reasons that go beyond fears of mass unemployment.
In 2014, China had just 11 robots per 10,000 employees in non-automotive industries, and just 213 per 10,000 employees on automotive assembly lines.
Although China is closing the gap by increasing its spending on robots, poorer countries face significant barriers to adopting new technologies.
Moreover, the region’s lower wages give firms an incentive to retain human workers.
At the factory in Bangladesh, human workers can step in if power outages or equipment failures knock the machines offline.
At the same time, having a fully automated section allows production to continue if workers go on strike.
Conventional wisdom decrees that this dual-track approach isn’t sustainable, and that low- to middle-skilled workers will eventually make way for robots.
A landmark 2013 study by Carl Frey and Michael Osborne of Oxford University suggests that, in the coming decades, 47% of total US employment will be at risk of automation.
Similarly, the International Labour Organization (ILO) has warned that 56% of total employment in Cambodia, Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand, and Vietnam is “at high risk of displacement due to technology over the next decade or two.”
But these grim predictions ignore the fact that most jobs comprise a bundle of tasks, some of which cannot be automated.
According to a 2016 OECD study that breaks down occupations by task, only 9% of jobs on average across 21 OECD countries are really at risk.
In Vietnam, for example, the share of jobs at risk falls from the ILO’s predicted 70% to just 15% when the country’s large informal economy is taken into account.
Street sweepers in developing countries are arguably less threatened by automation than their counterparts in developed countries, because their jobs are less mechanized and lower paid.
Still, robots are gaining a foothold in the region, particularly in economies such as China and South Korea.
In 2015, robot sales in Asia increased by 19% – the fourth record-breaking year in a row.
When less-developed Asian countries eventually join the technology bandwagon, layoffs will inevitably ensue.
To soften the blow, governments urgently need to pursue labor-market reforms and overhaul their education systems, starting with technical and vocational education and training (TVET).
Although TVET is becoming increasingly popular in Asia’s developing economies, its quality is often poor.
Governments should ensure that TVET courses focus on more relevant skills, while remaining flexible so that students can study without sacrificing income.
One option is to expand the availability of modular short courses, which take less time, train for specific tasks rather than entire jobs, and are more manageable for entrants who need, first and foremost, to earn money.
In Myanmar, for example, the government has launched a pilot program to target the country’s “missing million” students who drop out of school each year.
The program offers short courses on welding and other skills needed to repair rural machinery.
Competency-based assessment systems could also be particularly useful, given Asia’s large informal workforce.
Programs offering skilled workers a chance to earn certifications based on their work experience would allow for, say, uncertified electricians to find formal employment in robotics.
Asian countries should take a cue from India’s National Skill Development Corporation, which works with private training firms to match skills curricula with industry needs.
So far, India’s program has helped train more than 63,000 people.
Furthermore, governments should offer subsidies or tax incentives to companies that invest in the skills that humans master better than machines, such as communication and negotiation.
They will also have to adopt more flexible labor regulations, because firms won’t hire skilled workers who cost too much.
At the end of the day, Asia’s developing countries need policies that support workers, rather than jobs.
Retraining is particularly important, because automation will create entirely new industries and occupations.
The McKinsey Global Institute estimates that automation could boost global productivity growth by 0.8-1.4% annually, generating large savings and performance gains for businesses.
Improving access to training and certification would help countries capitalize on these advances and ensure more equitable growth, by giving workers the skills needed to handle the new jobs.
It would mean that businesses like the factory in Bangladesh could operate solely with robots, while its former workers would be gainfully employed elsewhere, most likely in jobs that don’t even exist yet.
When I was seven years old, in 1960, my grandmother Angelica opened my eyes to the meaning of 8 May 1945, the day when Nazi Germany surrendered and World War II ended in Europe.
We were spending our summer holidays in Normandy where the liberation of Europe from Nazism had started on D-Day, 6 June 1944.
One evening, I listened to my parents and my grandmother talking about the past.
I have forgotten the details of their conversation, but I can still hear my grandmother’s sigh of relief when she said “Thank God we lost that war!”
From a child’s perspective, it wasn’t self-evident that losing was a good thing.
The more I have thought about the lesson she taught me 45 years ago, the clearer I have seen another, less obvious dimension in what she said: It is “we” who lost the war.
Collectively, the Germans had not been the innocent victims of a small gang of criminal outsiders called “Nazis” – Nazism had been an inside ideology supported by millions of Germans, and every German was liable for its atrocities whether or not he or she had adhered to it individually.
In today’s Germany, an overwhelming majority subscribes to the proposition that 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation – not only for Europe, but also for Germany itself.
Compared to public opinion in 1960, that’s certainly an enormous progress.
But paradoxically, it may also contain an element of forgetfulness, because it tends to conceal the fact that liberation required a military defeat.
To use my grandmother’s parlance, it is not “us” who were the liberators, but “them”.
The way people see the past tells us more about their present attitudes than about the past itself.
This is what the term “politics of memory” is meant to indicate.
And this is why it doesn’t matter whether the relevant events happened 60 years ago (as World War II), 90 years (as in the case of the Armenian genocide) or even 600 years (such as the battle of Kosovo in 1389).
A violent conflict in the past may survive as a war of memories in the present, as can be observed in the current dispute between China and South Korea on one side, and Japan on the other.
A war of memories, in turn, may sometimes lead to a violent conflict in the future.
Former perpetrators often try to de-legitimize their former victims’ moral superiority by claiming they were victims themselves.
Therefore, the 60th anniversary of the firebombing of Dresden by Allied forces on 13 February 1945 has probably been a more crucial moment in terms of the German “politics of memory” than the 60th anniversary of 8 May 1945 is going to be.
Far-right groups infamously dubbed the attack by which at least 30,000 people were killed “Dresden’s Holocaust of bombs.”
Although it is true that thousands of the civilians killed in Dresden and other German cities were innocent at an individual level, there can be no doubt it was morally imperative that Germany be defeated collectively.
On the left side of the German political spectrum, the proposition that 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation remains unchallenged.
However, it is sometimes repressed that the massive use of force had been necessary to achieve that result.
Its slogan “Never again war!” is only half the truth – the other half is “Never again appeasement!” 8 May 1945 was not “zero hour,” as a popular saying in Germany goes.
It had an antecedent, that is, a lack of pre-emptive resistance at home and abroad to the threat that built up in Nazi Germany during the 1930’s.
Yes, 8 May 1945 was a day of liberation to which the Soviet army contributed decisively.
But for millions of Central and East Europeans, liberation was followed by Stalin’s oppressive regime.
The current war of memories between the Baltic republics and Russia, with regard to the international celebration in Moscow on 9 May this year, reminds Germany of a special historic responsibility.
The German-Soviet non-aggression treaty, the so-called Hitler-Stalin pact, concluded in August 1939, had been supplemented by a secret appendix dividing the border states Finland, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Romania into spheres of interest for the two parties.
But excusing Nazi atrocities by pointing to Stalinist crimes is an intellectually and morally unacceptable stratagem.
When Chancellor Schröder travels to Moscow for the Red Square celebrations, he should bear in mind Nazi Germany’s contribution to the Baltic tragedy.
On 8 May this year, public speakers will remind us how important it is not to forget.
They will stress that if the lessons of history are not learned, history is bound to repeat itself.
But personally, I will also remember my grandmother’s sentence “Thank God we lost that war!”
Thank God – and thanks to all those brave Allied soldiers who sacrificed their lives for the sake of Europe’s liberty.
MOSCOW/ROME: For a decade, Pope John Paul II has been flying in circles around Mother Russia: one day he visits the Baltics or his homeland of Poland; the next, Orthodox Romania and Georgia.
In June, 2001 Pope John Paul II will visit Ukraine and Armenia, both parts of the former Soviet Union and both still watched over warily by Russia’s Orthodox Church.
Karol Wojtyla, the first Slavic Pope in history, has long dreamed of visiting Moscow; indeed he may see such a visit as putting the finishing touch on his long, turbulent pontificate.
But, a decade after communism’s collapse, it is Russia’s churchmen, not its politicians, who are blocking the way.
From Khrushchev onward, Moscow’s rulers eyed the Vatican suspiciously but not without interest.
Kremlin leaders instinctively understood the benefits of normalising relations with the Holy See for Soviet propaganda and foreign policy, and meetings between the Pope and Andrei Gromyko and Nikolai Podgorny did take place.
Not until 1989, however, did Mikhail Gorbachev dare establish official relations with the Vatican, inviting Pope John Paul II to visit the Soviet Union.
Boris Yeltsin repeated the invitation in 1991, and Vladimir Putin did the same on his visit to Rome soon after his inauguration as Russia’s president.
No papal visit to Moscow has taken place, however, because Russia’s Orthodox Church remains opposed.
The Russian Orthodox attitude is voiced repeatedly by Patriarch Alexy II and his closest aides, including the Patriarchy’s “foreign minister,” Metropolitan Kyrill.
Before the announcement of the Papal visit to Ukraine, the Italian newspaper "Corriera della Sera" quoted Patriarch Alexy II as admitting that a papal visit was possible, but only if “persecution” of Russian Orthodoxy by Catholics in western Ukraine and proselytising by Catholic clergy on the "canonic territory" of the Russian Orthodox church came to an end.
Although seemingly hardline, these two conditions are a step forward for the Patriarch from his notorious statement of a few years ago, when he said that a true Orthodox Christian must not even pick mushrooms in the same forest as a Catholic.
The Soviet Union, the Communist Party of the USSR, and the KGB may have collapsed, but the Russian Orthodox Church still defends the sacred borders of the former Russian empire.
Moreover, because almost half of the parishes overseen by the Moscow Patriarchate are abroad – in Ukraine, Belarus, Moldova, Central Asia and other regions – Patriarch Alexy II lays increasing stress on the global character of his church.
Indeed, the Russian Church’s archbishops presented their Patriarch a golden icon, one side of which depicted the Last Supper and the other a map of his vast canonical territory, to mark the tenth anniversary of his reign.
Clearly, all the bows and plaintive “mea culpas” made by the Pope over the past year to mark the 2000th anniversary of the Birth of Christ, have not satisfied the Patriarch.
So, sadly, the Pontiff’s dream of stepping on Russian soil, a soil lavishly showered with the blood of martyrs, before what the Pope has called this terrible "wolverine" century comes to an end, may never come true.
Opportunities for a meeting between the two church leaders still exist, of course.
For example, in 2001 both the Catholic and Orthodox Easter will fall on the same day – 15 April – an extremely rare occurrence.
I will never forget how two old men – the Pope and 90-year old Academician Dmitry Likhachev – leafed through a rare book together with tears in their eyes.
Likhachev was showing the Pope an album about the Solovetsy camp where Likhachev had been imprisoned for “religious propaganda”.
The album contained photographs of the windows of the old monk’s cells to which the Soviets had affixed bars; for years these cells imprisoned Catholic clergymen, such as those arrested after State Prosecutor Nikolay Krylenko proclaimed the Catholic Church “an enemy of the people” in 1917.
No one in authority in Russia, however, has ever repented for crimes committed against the country’s own people.
The hierarchy of the Russian Orthodox Church, indeed, has not admitted the sins of its collaboration with the Soviet state.
Such a “mea culpa” from Russia might also help begin to heal the wounds of the Catholic/Orthodox division.
The Pope made the first step in a meeting last spring with Patriarch Shenuda III of the Coptic Orthodox Church during the Pope’s visit to the Holy land.
John Paul II hinted, daringly, at the possibility of revising the thousand-year old principle of the Bishop of Rome being first of the apostles and Christ’s vicar on earth.
According to the Kremlin press service, President Putin speaks to Patriarch Alexy II often.
Perhaps he should explain to him that failure to pursue rapprochement with the Vatican contradicts Russia’s state interests.
For the Kremlin and the Vatican see eye to eye on many problems, including the Middle East.
As Russia’s struggles to find a role and a voice in world diplomacy, having the Holy See as an ally would be beneficial.
“The tears of this century laid the ground for a new spring of the human spirit," the Pope declared in his last visit to the UN.
Russia, as everyone knows, has suffered as much as, if not more than, any country.
Sadly, as the title from one of Russia’s most beloved movies of the communist era tells us, it still seems that “Moscow (or at least its Patriarch) does not believe in tears.”
BERKELEY – Economic developments over the past 20 years have taught – or ought to have taught – the US Federal Reserve four lessons.
Yet the Fed’s current policy posture raises the question of whether it has internalized any of them.
The first lesson is that, at least as long as the current interest-rate configuration is sustained, the proper inflation target for the Fed should be 4% per year, rather than 2%.
A higher target is essential in order to have enough room to make the cuts in short-term safe nominal interest rates of five percentage points or more that are usually called for to cushion the effects of a recession when it hits the economy.
The Fed protests that to change its inflation target even once would erode the credibility of its commitment to ensuring price stability.
After all, what good is credibility today when it means sticking tenaciously to a policy that deprives you of the ability to do your job properly tomorrow?
The second lesson is that the two slope coefficients in the algebraic equation that is the Phillips curve – the link between expected inflation and current inflation, and the responsiveness of future inflation to current unemployment – are both much smaller than they were back in the 1970s or even in the 1980s.
He rightly judged that pushing for faster growth and lower unemployment was not taking excessive risks, but rather harvesting low-hanging fruit.
The third lesson is that yield-curve inversion in the bond market is not just a sign that the market thinks that monetary policy is too tight; it is a sign that monetary policy really is too tight.
The people who bid up the prices of long-term US Treasury bills in anticipation of interest-rate cuts when the Fed overshoots and triggers a recession are the same people who are now on tenterhooks wondering when to start cutting back on investment plans because a recession will soon produce overcapacity.
The Fed today has a “habitat theory” about why this time is different – that is, why the preferences of investors for particular maturity lengths imply that a yield-curve inversion would not mean what it has always meant.
But 2006, just before the financial crisis hit, was supposed to be different, too.
(And there were plenty of times before then that were supposed to be different, too.)
History suggests that this time is highly unlikely to be different – and that it will not end well if the Fed continues to believe and behave otherwise.
Back in the 1980s, it was not unreasonable to argue that the next large shock to the US macroeconomy was likely to be inflationary.
For the past three and a half decades, the principal shocks have not been inflationary, like the 1973 and 1979 oil crises, but rather deflationary, like the US savings and loan crisis in the 1980s and 1990s, the 1997 Asian crisis, the 2000 dot-com bust, the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, the 2007 subprime collapse that began in the US, and the 2010 European debt crash.
Former Fed Chair Janet Yellen told me back in the 1990s that, in her view, conducting the Fed’s internal debate within the framework of interest-rate rules had greatly increased the ease of getting from agreement about the structure and state of the economy to a rough consensus on appropriate policy.
But, at least as I see it, right now the Fed’s process of getting from a realistic view of the economy to an appropriate monetary policy does not seem to be functioning well at all.
Perhaps it is time for the Fed to place its internal discussions in a more explicit framework.
One can imagine, for example, the Fed adopting an “optimal control” method, whereby monetary-policy settings are established by running multiple simulations of a macroeconomic model using different combinations of interest rates and balance-sheet tools to project future inflation and unemployment.
The problem for optimal control methods is that the real world is not some closed system where economic relationships never change, or where they change in fully predictable ways.
The most effective – and thus the most credible – monetary policy is one that reflects not only the lessons of history, but also a willingness to reconsider long-held assumptions.
YALTA – Given its rapid and successful development, there can be no doubt that the People’s Republic of China will become one of the dominant global powers of the twenty-first century.
Indeed, despite the massive problems that the country is confronting, it could even emerge as the global power.
But it would be a mistake to assume that the reemergence of so-called “XXL powers” like China and India will simply bring a continuation of Western traditions.
Ever since the European powers set sail at the end of the fifteenth century to conquer the world, historiography and international politics have become accustomed to a certain pattern: military, economic, and technological power is translated into the exercise of influence over other countries, conquest, and even global dominance and empire.
This was particularly true in the twentieth century, when, in the wake of two world wars, the United States and the Soviet Union replaced the European world powers on the global stage.
The Cold War and the period of US global dominance after 1989/1990 followed this pattern as well.
But China’s rise to global power, I believe, will not, owing to its massive population of 1.2 billion people, which threatens to overstretch the structures of any kind of government system and its decision makers.
This is all the more true in times of rapid fundamental change, as is occurring in China now.
The permanent danger of overstretching the country’s internal political structures is unlikely to permit any imperial foreign-policy role.
Insofar as this is true, the United States won’t be replaced as the dominant power unless and until it abdicates that role.
This may sound simple, but it will have far-reaching consequences for the coming century’s international order.
The vital interests guiding Chinese policy are internal modernization, the ruling regime’s political stability and survival, and the country’s unity (which includes Taiwan).
As a result, China will become a largely inward-looking superpower, which – precisely for that reason – will pursue its foreign-policy interests in a completely unsentimental manner.
Militarily, China will focus primarily on its regional supremacy, because the country’s unity depends on it.
Otherwise, though, the transformation of China’s economy and society will be all-important, because the regime’s stability depends on it.
For the Chinese leadership, this means that a growth rate of about 10% per year will be essential for a long time.
Otherwise, the rapid and fundamental transformation of the country from a largely agrarian to an ultra-modern industrialized society could not proceed without destabilizing the system.
But this focus on internal growth will have massive political consequences, both domestically and in foreign-policy terms.
Domestically, China will be the first country that, due to its sheer size and required GDP growth, is forced to pursue a “green” economy.
Otherwise, China would quickly reach its “limits to growth,” with disastrous ecological and, as a result, political consequences.
Since China will be the most important market of the future, it will be decisive in determining not only what we produce and consume, but how.
Despite European illusions to the contrary, this will be decided in China, not in the West.
All that will be decided by the West’s globally dominant automobile industry is whether it will adapt and have a chance to survive or go the way of other old Western industries: to the developing world.
In foreign-policy terms, China will attempt to protect its domestic transformation by securing resources and access to foreign markets.
Sooner or later, though, China’s government will come to realize that America’s role as a global regulator is indispensible for China’s vital foreign-policy interests, because China is unable to assume that role, other global players aren’t available, and the only alternative to the US would be a breakdown of order.
This US-Chinese tandem will run far from smoothly, and will do little but ameliorate crises and periods of serious economic and political confrontation, like that which is currently looming over the bilateral trade imbalance.
Strategically, however, China and the US will have to rely on one another for a long time.
This co-dependency will, at some point, also take shape politically, probably to the chagrin of all other international players, particularly the Europeans.
Europe could change the course of this development only if it presented itself as a serious player and stood up for its interests on the global stage.
The “G-2” of China and the US would probably be happy about that.
But Europe is too weak and too divided to be effective globally, with its leaders unwilling to pursue a common policy based on their countries’ own strategic interests.
LONDON – Britain will have a new prime minister today – but the country’s post-European Union future remains uncertain.
Indeed, prolonged delays are likely in implementing the voters’ decision to leave the EU.
The process should be completed within two years of invoking Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon; but the incoming prime minister, Theresa May, has already said she would not want to trigger negotiations until the end of the year.
The second uncertainty is whether the negotiations can simultaneously resolve the United Kingdom’s terms of exit from the EU and its future trading arrangements with Europe’s single market.
While the UK will claim that, under Article 50, negotiators should be “taking into account the framework of future relationships,” the EU trade negotiator is insisting that future arrangements can be discussed only after Britain leaves.
Will it seek full access to the single market (the Norwegian option), or to part of it (the Swiss option)?
Or will it go for the Canadian low-tariff option, or just trade with Europe on the same terms that all World Trade Organization members do?
The fourth uncertainty arises from voters’ concerns over immigration and the extent to which any new EU trading arrangement must be conditional on restricting the free movement of workers.
The new prime minister has said she would not accept engagement in the single market without a deal on managing migration.
In theory, the Norway option – membership of the European Economic Area – could be stretched to include a Liechtenstein-type protocol on limiting residency permits, or involve use of the EEA’s safeguard clause, which might allow restrictions on migration if inflows rose too quickly.
But, fearful that others would demand a similar dispensation, the EU would find it difficult to agree to such a change.
The fifth uncertainty is the EU’s own negotiating stance, starting with who will lead the negotiations, the European Commission or the Council of Ministers.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel has already made it clear that she will not give the Commission carte blanche to negotiate on Germany’s behalf.
Beyond this question lies another: whether Europe will agree on its final negotiating stance before France’s presidential election next spring and Germany’s general election next autumn.
Britain appears to be sliding toward recession as companies put their investment plans on hold.
Business pressure on the UK government to move more quickly will thus grow, as a longer wait means a further ebbing of confidence and, in turn, a weakening of Britain’s bargaining position.
Two centuries on, the outgoing prime minister, David Cameron, may be remembered for losing two unions – with Europe and between England and Scotland.
Whereas Conservatives want Scotland to be in a Britain without Europe, Scottish nationalists want Scotland in a Europe without Britain.
And with Northern Ireland’s Republicans, led by Sinn Fein, demanding a vote to reunite with the south, the very existence of the UK is now squarely on the agenda.
There is one way to lessen uncertainty and risk: The government should quickly announce that it will be negotiating with the EU on the basis of the Norway option of membership of the EEA.
And it should make clear that EU nationals resident in the UK are welcome to stay.
While the UK would still have to contribute to the EU budget, it could repatriate responsibility for agriculture and fisheries policies and negotiate its own trade deals (for example, with China and India).
Joining the EEA would offer an additional advantage – giving Scotland the level playing field it wants in trading with the 27 EU members.
Any genuine solution must include a fund to help communities whose health facilities, schools, and other public services are under stress because of above-average population growth.
Tougher enforcement of minimum-wage and other legislation protecting workers is needed as well, so that we allay fears that migrants are forcing a race to the bottom.
And EEA negotiations should begin on the basis that our membership would include a protocol on migration and the ability to use the safeguard clause if pressures grow.
An eighth and even greater uncertainty, however, concerns Britain’s future global role.
In particular, how will it respond to the irreversible shift in the global economy’s center of gravity toward Asia, and to the technological innovations that are revolutionizing industries and occupations – and thus increasing voters’ anxieties about their employment prospects and future livelihoods?
The referendum result revealed high concentrations of pro-Brexit sentiment in towns once at the center of the British industrial revolution but now awash with derelict factories and workshops, owing to Asian competition.
These areas rebelled against the advice of political and business elites to vote “Remain” and instead demanded protection from the vicissitudes of global change.
The “Leave” campaign’s very slogans – centered on bringing control back home – aligned it with populist, protectionist movements that are fracturing old political loyalties throughout the West.
The result has exposed a Labour Party divided between a leadership that elevates anti-globalization protest above winning power and a Parliamentary group that knows it has to explain how globalization can be managed in the public interest.
Some believe in a global free-for-all; others believe that Britain should be free of foreign entanglements; and a third cohort wants, like Labour, to be part of the EU, viewing it not as the problem, but as part of the solution to managing globalization.
But, because of these divisions, none of the leadership contenders have put forward any proposals that address in any meaningful way the grievances of those who feel left behind.
So post-referendum Britain needs a more comprehensive debate on how it will cope with the challenges of global change and how it will work with the international community to do so.
A viable program for managing globalization would recognize that every country must balance the autonomy it desires with the cooperation it needs.
This would include coordinated monetary and fiscal policies across the G20 countries; renewed efforts to expand world trade; new national agendas addressing inequality and promoting social mobility; and a laser-like focus on science, technology, and innovation as the key to future growth.
As long as globalization appears leaderless, anti-globalization protesters will stifle reform, shout down proposed trade deals like the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership and the Trans-Pacific Partnership, and make national economies less open.
Now facing life outside the EU, Britain cannot ignore or sidestep these global issues.
The UK must now decide whether it will stand up to the protectionist impulse that drove Brexit and what part it can play in making globalization work for all.
PARIS – US President Donald Trump has shaken a transatlantic alliance that had long seemed unshakable.
In a January interview, he labeled NATO “obsolete” and the European Union a “vehicle for Germany.”
The EU will soon collapse, he predicted, with a succession of countries following the United Kingdom out.
The United States, his position suggests, would be more than fine with that.
With Trump, the world is becoming accustomed to shocking declarations and shameless reversals.
From his enthusiastic support of Brexit to his expressions of mistrust regarding German Chancellor Angela Merkel, the leader of Europe’s main ally seems intent on weakening the EU at a critical moment in its history.
Trump is not alone in his administration in cheering for the EU’s demise: his chief strategist, Stephen Bannon, embraces ethnic nationalist parties – like Marine Le Pen’s far-right National Front in France – that seek to bring it about.
Trump’s reported pick to be EU ambassador, Ted Malloch, told Greek television that he believes Greece should have left the eurozone four years ago.
But even more worrisome than the US administration’s doubts is the wavering confidence of many EU leaders.
European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker, for example, openly frets about the deep divisions among EU member states over Brexit and questions whether “the Hungarians and the Poles want exactly the same things as the Germans and the French.”
At the national level, lack of political will has resulted in the craven use of referenda, such as the French and Dutch plebiscites on the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe in 2005, the Netherlands’ vote on the EU-Ukraine association agreement last April, and the Brexit referendum nearly three months later.
In every case, voters said, “no” – outcomes that can be blamed, particularly in the UK, on national leaders’ habit of blaming the EU for domestic problems.
Indeed, European leaders’ parochialism is a major reason why the EU is failing to retain broad-based public support.
The lack of historical vision among the current generation of political leadership undermines the shared sense of purpose needed to make EU citizens feel that they are part of the same community, regardless of their different national identities.
When national identity is all there is, right-wing populists can win support by defending it against “foreign” Europe.
To be sure, many claim that popular disaffection with the EU and, in turn, the rise of right-wing populism is a reaction to the lack of structural reforms in the eurozone.
The creation of a banking union and the establishment of the “European Semester,” aimed at strengthening budgetary coordination across the union, are both steps in the right direction.
But, because the EU is not a nation-state, such solutions must be negotiated – no easy feat, when citizens are being turned against the union.
In any case, it seems unlikely that the rise of right-wing populism in Europe truly stemmed from the eurozone’s weaknesses, given that it aligns so closely with the rise of Trump in the US.
What the US and EU countries have in common, politically, is the use of false claims and scare tactics to compel citizens to retreat inward.
In France in 2005, anti-EU forces claimed that the ratification of the constitutional treaty would lead to the abolition of abortion rights and French military intervention in Iraq.
In 2014, Juncker had to tell then-British Prime Minister David Cameron, who later initiated the Brexit referendum, to stop portraying Eastern Europeans as criminals.
During the Brexit campaign, Boris Johnson argued that Brexit would bring an additional £350 million ($430 million) per week to the National Health Service.
In short, the main factor undermining the EU is not economic, but political.
After all, though the single market is one of Europe’s crowning achievements, the EU has always been an essentially political project.
This is why Europe’s future lies in a restructuring of the eurozone as a political entity, underpinned by more comprehensive cooperation.
As French Foreign Minister Robert Schuman declared in 1950, it is “de facto solidarity” that must underpin the making of Europe.
To some extent, Trump’s hostility toward Europe, not to mention the rising bellicosity of Russian President Vladimir Putin, could actually help the EU, by showing its members just how badly they need one another, particularly to ensure their defense and security.
Even before Trump began denigrating NATO, the European Commission released a global strategy emphasizing that NATO can no longer be solely responsible for ensuring European security.
To this end, the European Commission has proposed the European Defense Fund, which would foster common defense research and allow participating member states to reduce costs through collective purchases of military assets.
The effort by France and Germany to establish a “joint and permanent EU military headquarters” tasked with the overseas deployment of EU troops is also a step in the right direction.
A common security policy will be vital to help the EU address another major challenge: the migration crisis.
European countries must work together to dismantle human-smuggling operations and impose severe criminal sanctions on their organizers.
Efforts to control migration must be undertaken alongside the fight against Islamist terrorism, because the public – rightly or wrongly – has come to believe that the two issues are linked.
The anti-EU and anti-immigrant Le Pen must not be the only French presidential candidate addressing these concerns.
On the contrary, for many European citizens – from Ireland to Greece, and even in Hungary and Poland – the vote was a wake-up call, showing that the EU really could fall apart without adequate support.
European voters’ resolve to preserve the EU will be tested this year in the Netherlands, France, and Germany.
Their choice is between the insecure, war-prone Europe of yesterday and the confident, united Europe of tomorrow.
WASHINGTON, DC – Hardly a day goes by without another article, conference, or research initiative devoted to the future of work.
The robots are coming, or they’re not coming as fast as we think; when they do come, they’ll put everyone out of work, or they’ll create as many jobs as they destroy.
But what if, instead of trying to predict the future, we look at realities that exist today for billions of people?
Some 80% of the global population lives in emerging economies – defined by informal markets and fluid employment structures.
The SHIFT: Commission on Work, Workers, and Technology invited groups in five cities across the United States to imagine four scenarios along two axes of change – more or less work, and more jobs or more tasks.
Participants were divided as to the amount of future work, but almost all foresaw the continuing disaggregation of jobs into tasks in both low- and high-end work, from driving to lawyering.
First, people layer multiple work streams and derive income from more than one source.
Those lucky men and women who have formal jobs (less than 40%) often have “side hustles” through which they sell their time, expertise, network, or ideas to others in an effort to hedge against an uncertain labor market.
A Nigerian saying – “you have a 9 to 5, a 5 to 9 and a weekend job” – aptly describes the environment of layered work.
A report by the JPMorgan-Chase Institute concludes that platform jobs are largely a secondary source of income, used to offset dips in regular income.
A key difference, however, is that in emerging economies flexible networks of individuals or small businesses take the place of formal employers.
Kenya’s informal sector – called in Kiswahili the Jua Kali (“hot sun”) – is the country’s main job creator.
The 2017 Economic Survey in Kenya showed that the Jua Kali generated 747,300 jobs the previous year, whereas the formal sector added only 85,600.
The Jua Kali comprises sector-based associations among workers and artisans that harken back to medieval guilds.
The associations – of carpenters, mechanics, plumbers, and so on – enable pooled savings, provide opportunities to upgrade skills, and create a form of market regulation.
As technology has been added, many of the associations are going online to match supply and demand in the informal labor market more effectively.
Go-Jek in Indonesia (named as a pun on ojek, a motorcycle taxi) is a $2.5 billion company that delivers everything from food to hairdressers by motorbike through an app.
The company, with more than 200,000 drivers on the platform, boosts Indonesians’ productivity in the face of snarling traffic.
The market for low-cost legal services in Accra, Ghana, provides another interesting example.
Journalist Joseph Warungu describes a “narrow alleyway at the back of the court buildings” teeming with notaries, commissioners for oaths, letter writers, and lawyers offering services from witness statements to contracts, all “processed efficiently and at a pocket-friendly rate.”
That alleyway is a platform, bringing together multiple sellers of separate legal services together with buyers, in contrast to a traditional law firm, which requires clients to purchase multiple services from the same source.
Bliss Lawyers has “a bench” of more than 15,000 lawyers across the US who are paid over $200 an hour for “work on an engagement basis for in-house legal department and law firm clients.”
More broadly, the Business Talent Group provides “in-demand business talent on-demand,” across a wide range of professional services.
Emerging markets also offer a cautionary tale concerning the downside of the on-demand economy.
The world’s 50 most unequal economies are in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America, with South Africa taking the prize for the highest income inequality.
Informal markets, lack of access to finance, and poor educational opportunities in these countries continue to trap most people in relative poverty.
Gig economy platforms that provide small jobs without benefits or career progression can supplement income and buffer other employment, but they do not add up to the security and advancement opportunities of a formal job.
Indeed, most emerging-market workers turn to the gig economy not out of a desire for flexibility or to follow their passions, but simply to make ends meet.
Nonetheless, informal markets in developing countries provide a vast field for experimentation to transform a patchwork of jobs into a steady upward path for workers.
Tailoring education to allow workers to get the on-demand skills they need when they need them, and creating verifiable work histories through blockchain, are two ways to help gig economy workers find suitable opportunities more efficiently and capture more value from selling their labor.
While developed countries in Europe, North America, and Asia are rapidly aging, emerging economies are predominantly youthful.
They are products of dynamic informal markets, and that should ease their absorption into a tech-enabled gig economy.
Nigerian, Indonesian, and Vietnamese young people will shape global work trends at an increasingly rapid pace.
NEW YORK – Earlier this month, I sat on a panel in Monte Carlo, a hotspot of the establishment, discussing the question, “Why can't Europe be more like the US?”
The formal name of the panel was “Silicon Envy: Will Europe ever build the next new media giant?”
After all, what is the actual value of a Microsoft or an Apple, Oracle, Google, or Twitter to a country in the first place?
Surely, it's not the taxes paid by Bill Gates or Steve Jobs or Larry Ellison or Sergey Brin, nor even the taxes paid by their companies (of which other countries get a share anyway).
And their products and services generate value even when pirated or used in countries where the provider doesn’t sell much advertising.
A country can get all these benefits without actually being the entrepreneur's home country.
But there are two benefits that do redound to a hero entrepreneur’s home country.
He (rarely she) encourages people to dream – and also to take risks, persist in the face of long odds, and generate economic activity.
All over the world, little boys study math and science in the hope of becoming the next Bill Gates.
I'll always remember what a Russian friend said to me back in 1991 at a conference I organized in Hungary: “Of course we all know about Bill Gates in Russia.
But he’s not relevant to us: he lives in the US; he went to Harvard.
In an economy such as the United States, where start-ups are revered, people who would make perfectly good project supervisors or salespeople establish their own companies, starving the ecosystem of middle managers.
Thousands of perfectly smart and highly useful people feel inadequate because they are not heroes.
For example, I know a brilliant chief technology officer who started a company that never gained traction because he simply couldn’t manage it.
His investors (including me) encouraged him to merge with a competitor that had a great salesman as its CEO.
But the two CEOs couldn’t agree on terms, and now the CTO’s company is dead while the other company struggles with inadequate technology.
In cultures where start-ups are considered risky and not quite honorable, it’s also hard for entrepreneurs to find troops to play the non-starring roles.
So, rather than focusing on the supposed shortage of entrepreneurs, consider for a moment the very real shortage of qualified people willing to work for them.
For every Bill Gates or Steve Jobs who founds a company, a healthy economy needs tens, hundreds, and ultimately thousands of such troops.
But right now, in the Silicon Valley that almost every country envies, TechCrunch reports that Google just paid an engineer $3.5 million in restricted stock to keep him from defecting to Facebook.
This is an even bigger problem for the hundreds of start-ups that want to hire engineers but can’t afford to compete with the likes of Google and Facebook.
And, while the US has many engineers of its own (and imports others, despite restrictive immigration policies), many other countries do not, exacerbating the challenges smaller start-ups there face in getting qualified people.
Both in the US and elsewhere, most education systems aren’t churning out the kinds of people start-ups need to hire.
The problem is not just a lack of engineers, but also of people with the necessary business, financial, and communication skills.
Many large companies in emerging markets such as Russia and India train their own employees, because college graduates often lack the requisite skills.
That’s good for large companies, but it leaves behind smaller companies that can’t afford to train the middle ranks or compete for the best.
Countries that want to be successful overall, rather than merely to play host to a couple of billionaire entrepreneurs who eventually will decamp to a tax haven, must focus on building a strong educational system for all their citizens.
That is where the notion of the entrepreneur as hero can be helpful – by inducing more young people to study math and science, which will help them in many ways even if they pursue a non-technical career.
Instead of subsidizing start-ups directly, governments should become good customers for them.
The US government is a huge customer for all kinds of software companies, just as it helped to build the airline industry long ago by contracting out postal service transportation.
Entrepreneurs tend to go where the money is, but their companies stay and provide value (and jobs) where they can find good customers and good employees.
It is the well- educated who can get the best jobs – and thus earn the money to buy the kinds of goods and services that they and their fellows produce.
OXFORD – Recent evidence suggests that much of the world has entered a period of low financial-market volatility.
But this is no time for complacency; more turbulent times are likely to lie ahead.
Over the last quarter-century, rapid technology-driven globalization – characterized by the physical and virtual integration of the global economy, including the opening of world markets – has contributed to the fastest increase in incomes and population in history.
But, while globalization has created unprecedented opportunity, it has also unleashed a new form of systemic risk – one that threatens to devastate political institutions and national economies.
Greater openness and integration necessarily increase the potential for cascading crises and amplification of shocks.
As individuals and societies become richer, they come into closer contact with one another – virtually, through communication technologies, and physically, through population growth, urbanization, and travel.
Meanwhile, rising consumption of products like food, energy, and medicine enhances the externalities, or spillover effects, of individual choices, with the connectivity of global systems increasing these effects’ range and impact.
But when billions of people take antibiotics, and livestock producers use them to boost efficiency, they often become ineffective.
The same paradox applies to energy use, owing to the destructive impact of large-scale carbon emissions.
Even the consumption of basic necessities like food (production of which can have major environmental consequences) and water (given limited supplies) is not exempt.
Furthermore, increased openness and market integration, driven by rapid technological change, is exacerbating divisions within and among societies.
Those who miss the globalization train at the start often are unable to catch up later.
Nowadays, the world’s most pressing challenges – from climate change to cyber-crime – increasingly transcend national borders, making them extremely difficult to address effectively.
Worse, they can have a cascading effect, with, say, a pandemic or cyber-attack provoking a financial or political crisis and imposing costs disproportionately on those who can least afford them.
The vectors of connectivity – such as the Internet, financial markets, airport hubs, or logistics centers – facilitate “super-spreading” of globalization’s effects, both positive and negative.
Though the systemic risks brought about by globalization cannot be eliminated, they can be mitigated, if world leaders work together and learn from past mistakes.
For starters, national politics in key countries is largely moving away from cooperation, with rising inequality and social fragmentation making it difficult for governments, especially in democracies, to make tough decisions.
Europe, for example, is witnessing an upsurge in support for nationalist parties, like Britain’s UK Independence Party, and increasingly loud calls for self-determination, such as in Scotland and Catalonia.
Equally problematic, the world has largely failed to learn from globalization’s most obvious and far-reaching consequence yet: the 2008 financial crisis.
While it is impossible to safeguard the system fully, sound regulation and effective oversight could have prevented the crisis, or at least reduced its impact on millions of people’s livelihoods.
The problem was that central banks, finance ministries, and multilateral organizations like the International Monetary Fund – the pillars of the global economy’s institutional framework – failed to grasp globalization’s emerging characteristics and effects, owing partly to the difficulty of discerning structural shifts in the huge mass of data now available.
In this sense, the crisis should have served as a wake-up call, spurring the financial sector, policymakers, and multilateral organizations to take action to enhance systemic stability.
But, despite employing tens of thousands of highly educated economists whose primary job is to determine how best to protect the financial system from globalization’s destabilizing effects, these institutions seem to be even less willing to act now than they were before the crisis.
This is particularly true in the advanced economies, where depleted financial reserves and political paralysis are preventing constructive investments in areas like infrastructure and education, which can enable citizens to take advantage of globalization’s benefits.
Making matters worse, some of these countries have reduced their contributions and commitment to the reform of regional and global institutions, which are essential to managing systemic risks.
In this context, it is not surprising that ordinary citizens feel uncertain about the future and frustrated with their governments, which have so far failed to protect them from globalization’s fallout.
But wresting power back from regional and international institutions – however shadowy and distant they may seem – would only compound the problem, for it would reduce the ability to guide the supranational trends that are shaping the world’s future.
It is time for our leaders to recognize new systemic risks and work together to mitigate them.
Otherwise, the recent past will be prologue, with those risks likely to get the better of the global economy.
HONG KONG – With China's economic slowdown more apparent than ever, its prospects of avoiding a hard landing are weakening.
Whether policymakers succeed will depend on whether they can navigate the challenges stemming from an increasingly divided dual-track economy.
The latest year-on-year data, from January, highlight the danger.
The consumer price index dropped to 0.8%; the producer price index fell by 4.3%; exports contracted by 3.3%; imports were down by 19.9%; and growth of broad money (M2) slowed by 1.4%.
Moreover, the renminbi has come under downward pressure, owing partly to economic recovery in the United States, which has fueled capital outflows.
Given huge declines in industrial profit growth (from 12.2% in 2013 to 3.3% last year) and in local-government revenues from land sales (which fell by 37% in 2014), there is considerable anxiety that today's deflationary cycle could trigger corporate and local-government debt crises.
China hopes to secure its long-term economic development by shifting from a state-directed to a market-led economy.
But the process has created significant discrepancies in economic performance, with state-owned enterprises (SOEs) performing significantly worse than their private-sector counterparts, despite having better access to credit.
And there is a widening disparity between real-estate prices in China's thriving first- and second-tier cities and its lagging third- and fourth-tier cities (though higher household incomes in the former make housing there more affordable).
The authorities' task now is to determine how to support continued growth on the better performing track (the private sector and the first- and second-tier cities), while eliminating overcapacity and boosting productivity on the weaker track (SOEs and third- and fourth-tier cities).
To succeed, they must address the fallout of the previous approach, which, by providing more money and preferential policies to the lagging track, ended up fueling overcapacity and unsustainable local debts.
In other words, China must confront the sunk costs of bad local-planning decisions.
Instead of continuing to hope that bureaucratic intervention can repair flawed projects, officials should take a market-based approach, allowing losses to be allocated through the bankruptcy process, thereby enabling all stakeholders to move on to more productive activities.
The Chinese economy's dual-track structure also presents unique challenges for macro-financial management.
As the fast-growing sectors absorb an increasing amount of resources, a shift toward more market-oriented interest rates is needed to ensure efficient allocation.
Meanwhile, the slow-growing sectors risk falling into a “balance-sheet recession," with highly indebted SOEs and local governments becoming so focused on paying down their debts that they stop investing in needed infrastructure, even when interest rates fall.
As a result, conventional monetary and macro-prudential policies are caught between competing demands for credit, with one track needing to support productive growth and the other attempting to buy time for restructuring.
The People's Bank of China (PBOC) has attempted to confront this dilemma by differentiating reserve requirements according to sector or type of financial institution.
For example, when the PBOC cut its benchmark interest rate last November, in order to help reduce private-sector borrowing costs, it triggered a speculative stock-market boom.
Following January's disappointing macroeconomic data, the PBOC acted again, by lowering the reserve ratio for banks by 50 basis points, with additional cuts for banks focused on small and medium-size enterprises (50 basis points) and for the Agricultural Development Bank of China (400 basis points).
Despite these efforts, neither track seems satisfied that their credit demands are being met.
Efforts to address these structural challenges are being frustrated not just by institutional barriers, but also by entrenched official corruption.
The problem is that anti-corruption measures, despite enjoying broad public support, undermine bureaucratic effectiveness in the short term – a significant issue in a critical reform year, especially given slowing growth.
Institutional reforms aimed at combating corruption, reducing overcapacity, and dealing with unsustainable local debts will generate long-term dividends and sustainable payoffs.
But short-term stimulus measures, such as tax cuts and higher fiscal deficits, will be needed to minimize growth disruptions.
This would mean reversing the recent decline in the government budget deficit, which narrowed to 1.8% last year, from 2% of GDP in 2013.
The transition from a dual-track economy to a market-based economy will not be easy.
But the news is not all bad: a substantial portion of the economy continues to expand, underpinning much higher overall growth rates than in most other economies.
Moreover, despite some concerns about capital outflows, China's consolidated net foreign-asset position, which stands at $1.7 trillion (17.6% of GDP), remains sufficient to sustain China through this tough transition.
China's leaders recognize the long-term imperative of serious institutional reform, even as concerns about slowing growth heighten the temptation to embrace short-term fixes.
The authorities are taking strong action to curb pollution, improve energy efficiency, implement pension reform, and expand access to health care and low-cost housing.
More immediately, China's leadership is committed to excising the cancer of corruption.
The key, as with any critical surgery, is to ensure that the necessary life-support systems are in place.
In the end, sustainable development will require that China's two economic tracks merge.
With the right approach, relatively stable and rapid growth can be maintained throughout the reform process.
Avoiding a hard landing would be good not only for China; it would ensure much-needed growth and stability for the global economy.
NEW YORK – Although America’s right-wing plutocrats may disagree about how to rank the country’s major problems – for example, inequality, slow growth, low productivity, opioid addiction, poor schools, and deteriorating infrastructure – the solution is always the same: lower taxes and deregulation, to “incentivize” investors and “free up” the economy.
When President Ronald Reagan tried it in the 1980s, he claimed that tax revenues would rise.
The big winners in relative terms were corporations and the rich, who benefited from dramatically reduced tax rates.
But, unlike his administration’s approach to health-care legislation, lack of transparency will not help him.
While many of the 32 million people projected to lose health insurance under the current proposal don’t yet know what’s coming, that is not true of the companies that will get the short end of the stick from Trump’s tax reform.
That’s a political imperative: with corporations sitting on trillions of dollars in cash while ordinary Americans are suffering, lowering the average amount of corporate taxation would be unconscionable – and more so if taxes were lowered for the financial sector, which brought on the 2008 crisis and never paid for the economic damage.
Moreover, Senate procedures dictate that to enact tax reform with a simple majority, rather than the three-fifths supermajority required to defeat an almost-certain filibuster by opposition Democrats, the reform must be budget-neutral for ten years.
This requirement means that average corporate-tax revenue must remain the same, which implies that there will be winners and losers: some will pay less than they do now, and others will pay more.
One might get away with this in the case of personal income tax, because even if the losers notice, they are not sufficiently organized.
Most economists would agree that America’s current tax structure is inefficient and unfair.
Perhaps innovative firms that create jobs should be rewarded, in part, by a tax break.
But the only rhyme or reason to who gets tax breaks appears to be the effectiveness of supplicants’ lobbyists.
One of the most significant problems concerns taxation of US corporations’ foreign-earned income.
Democrats believe that, because US corporations, wherever they operate, benefit from America’s rule of law and power to ensure that they are not mistreated (often guaranteed by treaty), they ought to pay for these and other advantages.
But a sense of fairness and reciprocity, much less national loyalty, is not deeply ingrained in many US companies, which respond by threatening to move their headquarters abroad.
Republicans, partly out of sensitivity to this threat, advocate a territorial tax system, like that used in most countries: taxes should be imposed on economic activity only in the country where it occurs.
The concern is that, after imposing a one-off levy on the untaxed profits that US firms hold abroad, introducing a territorial system would generate a tax loss.
To offset this, Paul Ryan, the speaker of the US House of Representatives, has proposed adding a tax on net imports (imports minus exports).
At the same time, so long as US net imports are as high as they are now, the tax would raise enormous revenues.
But there’s the rub: the money must come from someone’s pocket.
To Trump’s team, this is collateral damage, the inevitable price that must be paid to give America’s plutocrats more money.
But retailers such as Walmart, not just its customers, are part of the collateral damage, too.
Other corporate tax reforms might make sense; but they, too, imply winners and losers.
And so long as the losers are numerous and organized enough, they are likely to have the power to stop the reform.
A politically astute president who understood deeply the economics and politics of corporate tax reform could conceivably muscle Congress toward a reform package that made sense.
If corporate tax reform happens at all, it will be a hodge-podge brokered behind closed doors.
More likely is a token across-the-board tax cut: the losers will be future generations, out-lobbied by today’s avaricious moguls, the greediest of whom include those who owe their fortunes to scummy activities, like gambling.
The sordidness of all of this will be sugarcoated with the hoary claim that lower tax rates will spur growth.
There is simply no theoretical or empirical basis for this, especially in countries like the US, where most investment (at the margin) is financed by debt and interest is tax deductible.
The marginal return and marginal cost are reduced proportionately, leaving investment largely unchanged.
In fact, a closer look, taking into account accelerated depreciation and the effects on risk sharing, shows that lowering the tax rate likely reduces investment.
Small countries are the sole exception, because they can pursue beggar-thy-neighbor policies aimed at poaching corporations from their neighbors.
But global growth is largely unchanged – the distributive effects actually impede it slightly – as one gains at the expense of the other.
(And this assumes that the other does not respond and fuel a race to the bottom.)
In a country with so many problems – especially inequality – tax cuts for rich corporations will not solve any of them.
This is a lesson for all countries contemplating corporate tax breaks – even those without the misfortune of being led by a callow, craven plutocrat.
When we in Ethiopia’s political opposition agreed to participate in the election that the government called in June, we were under no illusion that the process would be faultless.
The dictatorship of Mengistu Haile Mariam was Africa’s most blood-curdling Marxist regime, and was replaced by today’s ruling EPRDF, whose “Revolutionary Democracy” is but a more subtle variation on the same theme.
So we knew that there would be problems with the election, that voting would not be clean in the way Western countries take for granted.
Yet we nonetheless believed that the opposition, led by the Coalition for Unity and Democracy (CUD), would have room to maneuver and campaign, owing to the government’s desire for international legitimacy.
So we decided to test the waters and push for a real political opening and a genuinely competitive vote.
The government did make some media available and engaged in more than 10 live televised debates.
So, at least at first, there seemed to have been some intention on the government’s part to open up the process – if not completely, then somewhat.
Now, however, it appears that the authorities wanted only a small, managed opening, on the assumption that they could control the outcome.
About a month before the election, the government began to shut down the political space it had opened.
Its election campaign took on a vilifying tone, charging that the opposition was bent on destroying ethnic groups through genocide.
Indeed, it called the opposition “interahamwe,” invoking the memory of the Hutu militia that slaughtered 800,000 Rwandan Tutsis in 1994.
Attendance at an official pro-government rally in the capital, Addis Ababa, was dwarfed by our rally the following day, when millions of demonstrators peacefully demanded change and showed their support for us.
At that point, the government realized that its democratic opening was slipping out of its control.
Two days before the vote, our poll watchers and supporters were searched, arrested, and given one-day trials, with most sentenced to one or two months in jail.
We feared that the voting would take place without the presence of our poll watchers.
So we gave a press conference – all the opposition parties together – the day before the vote, demanding that the government release our party workers and allow people to vote freely.
Although the government met neither of these demands, the early results clearly showed that the opposition was gaining a large number of seats.
It became obvious that we were winning in many constituencies and that we had won in Addis Ababa, as well as in most of the major cities and the rural areas.
In Addis Ababa, top government officials, including the ministers of education and capacity building, lost, as did the speaker of the House of People’s Representatives.
In rural constituencies, opposition candidates defeated such EPRDF heavyweights as the ministers of defense, information, and infrastructure, along with the presidents of the two largest regions, Oromia and Amhara.
The government wasted little time in responding: the next day, it declared itself the winner, with not even half of the constituencies reporting their results.
Soon after, our office workers were detained, and Hailu Shawel, Chairman of the CUD, and senior CUD official Lidetu Ayalew were put under house arrest.
One hundred staff members were taken from our head office in Addis Ababa alone, and many more from regional offices.
Up to 6,000 people were jailed – CUD members and even ordinary citizens.
My fear is that the will of Ethiopia’s people will be stifled by government hard-liners.
Doubts about the authenticity of the final results will create a danger of instability.
Everyone – the government, the opposition, and the public – must commit themselves to a peaceful resolution.
To restore calm before a recount can be held, confidence-building measures are needed.
Those held simply because they do not support the government must be freed and allowed to participate in the democratic process.
The government-controlled media must be open to diverse opinions; in particular, opposition access must be guaranteed.
Equally important, the international community must send observers – and thus a clear signal to the government that any attempt to maintain power by force or intimidation is unacceptable.
The world must keep watching, just as it watched in Georgia, Ukraine, Lebanon, and Palestine.
For the first time in our ancient history, we Ethiopians have voted our conscience.
CAMBRIDGE – When Greece was bailed out by a joint eurozone-IMF rescue package back in May, it was clear that the deal had bought only a temporary respite.
With Ireland’s troubles threatening to spill over to Portugal, Spain, and even Italy, it is time to rethink the viability of Europe’s currency union.
Unlike others, such as my Harvard colleague Martin Feldstein, who argue that Europe is not a natural monetary area, I believed that monetary union made perfect sense in the context of a broader European project that emphasized – as it still does – political institution-building alongside economic integration.
Europe’s bad luck was to be hit with the worst financial crisis since the 1930’s while still only halfway through its integration process.
The eurozone was too integrated for cross-border spillovers not to cause mayhem in national economies, but not integrated enough to have the institutional capacity needed to manage the crisis.
Consider what happens when banks in Texas, Florida, or California make bad lending decisions that threaten their survival.
If the banks are merely illiquid, the Federal Reserve in Washington is ready to act as a lender of last resort.
If they are judged to be insolvent, they are allowed to fail or are taken over by federal authorities, while depositors are made whole by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Similarly, in case of bankruptcy, federal laws and courts readily adjudicate claims among creditors, and do so without regard to state borders.
Regardless of the outcome, private debt is not socialized by state governments (but by the federal government, if at all), and does not threaten public finances at the state level.
State governments in turn have no legal power to abrogate debt contracts vis-à-vis out-of-state creditors, and no incentive to do so (given the help they get from the federal government).
So, even in the throes of a financial crisis, banks and non-financial firms can continue to borrow if their balance sheets are sound, uncontaminated by the “sovereign risk” of their state government.
Meanwhile, the federal government makes up for a good chunk of the drop in state incomes by transfers or reduced taxes.
Workers who nonetheless have it bad can move easily to better-performing states without worries about language differences or culture shock.
Almost all of this happens automatically, without long, contentious negotiations among state governors and federal officials, assistance from the IMF, or calling into question the existence of the United States as a unified political-economic entity.
So the real problem in Europe is not that Spain or Ireland has borrowed a lot, or that too much Spanish and Irish debt sits on banks balance sheets elsewhere in Europe.
After all, who cares about Florida’s current-account deficit – or even knows what it amounts to?
No, the real problem is that Europe has not created the union-wide institutions that an integrated financial market requires.
The European Union has taught us valuable lessons over the last few decades: first, that financial integration requires eliminating volatility among national currencies; next, that eradicating exchange-rate risk requires doing away with national currencies altogether; and now, that monetary union is impossible, among democracies, without political union.
It should have been expected that the political side of the equation would take time to fall into place.
But let us not underestimate the magnitude of the task that European governments took on.
In fact, the closest analogue to it is America’s own historical experience with building a federal republic.
As the long American struggle for “states’ rights” – and indeed the Civil War – shows, creating a political union out of a collection of self-governing entities is hardly a smooth or speedy process.
Worse still, economic union itself can fan the fires of nationalism and endanger political integration.
It places strains on each country’s institutions (seen in the pressure on Europe’s welfare states), breeds resentment against foreigners (witness the recent success of anti-immigration parties), and renders financial crises originating from abroad both likelier and costlier (as the current situation makes all too clear).
Ireland and the southern European countries must reduce their debt burden and sharply enhance their economies’ competitiveness.
It is hard to see how they can achieve both aims while remaining in the eurozone.
The Greek and Irish bailouts are only temporary palliatives: they do nothing to curtail indebtedness, and they have not stopped contagion.
The idea that structural and labor-market reforms can deliver quick growth is nothing but a mirage.
Even if the Germans and other creditors acquiesce in a restructuring – not from 2013 on, as German Chancellor Angel Merkel has asked for, but now – there is the further problem of restoring competitiveness.
This problem is shared by all deficit countries, but is acute in Southern Europe.
Membership in the same monetary zone as Germany will condemn these countries to years of deflation, high unemployment, and domestic political turmoil.
An exit from the eurozone may be at this point the only realistic option for recovery.
Countries can rejoin, and do so credibly, when the fiscal, regulatory, and political prerequisites are in place.
For the moment, the eurozone may well have reached the point where an amicable divorce is a better option than years of economic decline and political acrimony.
“When you say everything is a priority, then you are saying you don’t really have any priorities.”
Those were the words of US ambassador to the United Nations John Bolton as he attempted my challenge to establish concrete priorities for the world.
Politicians avoid creating prioritized ‘to do’ lists that could upset groups whose interests do not come first.
The UN spends billions of dollars promoting human rights, protecting the environment, fighting disease and reducing poverty.
Yet, choices about battling humanity’s biggest challenges are rarely founded in a principled framework of prioritization.
Decisions are mired in a constant battle for resources between competing interest groups, countries and organizations.
UN Deputy Secretary-General Mark Malloch Brown has pointed out that there is distrust between representatives of populous developing nations and those from wealthier states – a stand-off he calls “numbers versus pocketbooks”.
I gathered UN ambassadors from the US, China, India, Pakistan, Tanzania, Zambia, Russia, Egypt, Thailand and Vietnam in a project called Copenhagen Consensus.
The ambassadors – who together represent about half of the world’s population – listened to climate change experts tell them that global warming is a vital issue and that the Kyoto Protocol could be used to tackle it.
They heard from health experts who said that communicable diseases were rampant and that mosquito nets would be a great way to combat malaria.
Other experts told them that two-and-a-half billion people lack access to sanitation but investment in relatively simple projects could drastically reduce that number.
But with limited resources, we need to commit to solving some problems before others.
The essential question put to the ambassadors was: if you had an extra $50 billion, how should it be spent to achieve the most ‘good’ possible?’
The ambassadors considered the expert evidence and debated the pro and cons of each option before putting together a prioritized ‘to do’ list of solutions to the world’s greatest challenges (See List).
They concluded that the world’s top solutions are better health, cleaner water, more education and less hunger.
Nine out of ten deaths from communicable diseases in the developing world are avoidable.
The world could fight back with general health services in at-need areas along with more focused efforts to combat HIV and malaria.
The ambassadors found that providing clean drinking water and sanitation to the billion people lacking such amenities was crucial.
They also concluded that without a constant focus on education, other gains could not be sustained.
Eight hundred million people are chronically undernourished while three and a half billion lack micronutrients.
But choosing the issues at the top of a priority list is the easy part.
Asking politicians to choose what shouldn’t come first was the real test.
They concluded that although migration, corruption and conflicts are vital, these should not come first on the global priority list.
The evidence led them to believe that proposed solutions to financial instability and global warming – while both important topics – are not the right investments to start with.
The UN ambassadors’ first attempt at a deliberate prioritization shows that this approach could be used on a much bigger scale.
It could help to put the organization back on track and assist it to focus on doing the best things first.
As John Bolton pointed out, the UN has 9,000 mandates, which means 9,000 top priorities, which essentially means no priorities.
Thailand’s ambassador pointed out that using the Copenhagen Consensus prioritization framework could help the UN to ensure better, more effective utilization of scarce resources in tackling top issues.
Zambia’s ambassador believed that “all member countries of the UN would benefit from going through a similar process, becoming more aware of the need to prioritize.”
Perhaps it is now time to convene all of the UN member countries and ask them the hard but vital question: given that we can’t do it all, what should we do first?
List of priorities, outcome document from Copenhagen Consensus by UN ambassadors, June 16-17 2006 at Georgetown University:
BRUSSELS – We had almost given up waiting for them, but then they came in a quasi-clandestine form.
German Chancellor Angela Merkel did not announce her ideas for eurozone reform in a formal speech or in a statement before her peers.
Rather, she allowed a quickly cobbled-together and telegraphic Franco-German non-paper to leak ahead of the recent meeting of European heads of state and government.
There was no shortage of outcry in other European Union capitals (because of the paper’s undiplomatic bluntness) or in Brussels (because she did not care about EU procedures and the distribution of competences).
Whereas earlier, Chancellor Merkel had ruled out the old French idea of eurozone-specific governance for fear of being in a minority among Southern European countries, she has now drawn a lesson from the crisis and is proposing that eurozone countries go ahead and tighten cooperation with any others who are able and willing to join them.
On the fiscal side, Germany had started by insisting on bolstering sanctions.
As is often the case in criminal law, the idea was (and is) more about reassuring public opinion than about preventing wayward behavior.
In fact, the EU’s Stability and Growth Pact suffers at least as much from a flawed design as from lack of enforcement (it should never be forgotten that as late as 2007, Ireland and Spain looked like paragons of budgetary virtue).
Moreover, for ten years, stewardship from Brussels has failed to bring about reform of national policies, and it is not clear that additional or more automatic sanctions would elicit a greater sense of “ownership” of the rules.
The new paper opens a different path: it suggests revising and harmonizing national accounting, in order to gauge better the vulnerability of eurozone members’ public finances; ensuring that banks’ creditors, rather than governments, pay when crisis strikes; decentralizing fiscal discipline by requiring each country to adopt a constitutional rule on the stability of the debt ratio; and curbing countries’ contingent liabilities by adjusting pension systems to demographic ageing.
As long as each government is given enough autonomy in the implementation of these principles to act in accordance with its own institutional framework and traditions, such measures are all on the right track.
The paper urges all countries to align real wage growth with productivity gains, get rid of automatic indexation of wages (long gone in France but still alive in Belgium), and commit to a minimum rate of investment in research and development, education, and infrastructure.
The praiseworthy intention is to avoid a recurrence of the cost and price divergence within the eurozone during the last ten years.
The aim is also – and this is equally commendable – to share the burden of European economic modernization.
However, all of the indicators emphasized in the Franco-German initiative are already being monitored, and, since 2005, many – not least European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet – have loudly, regularly, and ineffectually warned of divergences within the eurozone.
Moreover, the discussions that started several months ago about imbalances within the eurozone have floundered on the issue of the symmetry of adjustment.
Those countries whose prices have shot up over the last decade point the finger, correctly, at German competitive disinflation, which has led the ECB to keep interest rates low instead of helping them to halt the price spiral.
Germany responds that it cannot be blamed for improving productivity, which is equally true.
The way out of this dialogue of the deaf requires acknowledging that competitiveness is a relative concept, and that all national policies, including those of surplus countries, must be part of the discussion.
The last set of proposals addresses a problem that has not been stressed enough: divergences within the eurozone reflect insufficient economic integration, for they would not have continued to widen if firms and workers had reacted more swiftly to price differences.
The Merkel document puts forward two ideas here: mutual recognition of qualifications, which would promote labor mobility, and – with no concern for the sanctity of tax sovereignty – harmonization of corporate-tax bases in order to encourage capital mobility.
Neither of these initiatives is a game changer as regards the depth of economic integration within the eurozone, but both promise to open a new debate on the structural underpinnings of monetary union.
The first reactions have been mostly negative, because of specific concerns such as wage indexation in Belgium or because the EU institutions want to preserve their legal prerogatives.
Non-eurozone countries are also concerned that further integration within the core would leave them left out.
Leaving bluntness and a disregard for procedures aside, eurozone members would be wrong to ignore or dilute these ideas.
The eurozone needs a Germany that is engaged, not absent, and the paper delivers a message that needs to be heard: (financial) solidarity goes hand in hand with (economic and budgetary) responsibility.
MELBOURNE – Louise Brown, the first person to be conceived outside a human body, turned 30 last year.
The birth of a “test-tube baby,” as the headlines described in vitro fertilization was highly controversial at the time.
Leon Kass, who subsequently served as chair of President George W. Bush’s Council on Bioethics, argued that the risk of producing an abnormal infant was too great for an attempt at IVF ever to be justified.
Some religious leaders also condemned the use of modern scientific technology to replace sexual intercourse, even when it could not lead to conception.
Since then, some three million people have been conceived by IVF, enabling otherwise infertile couples to have the child they longed for.
The risk of having an abnormal child through IVF has turned out to be no greater than when parents of a similar age conceive though sexual intercourse.
However, because many IVF practitioners transfer two or three embryos at a time to improve the odds of a pregnancy occurring, twins and higher multiple births are more common, and carry some additional risk.
In a recently released instruction, Dignitas Personae, the Church’s Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith objects to IVF on several grounds, including the fact that many embryos are created in the process, and few survive.
This outcome is not, however, very different from natural conception, for the majority of embryos conceived by sexual intercourse also fail to implant in the uterine wall, with the woman often not even knowing that she was ever “pregnant.”
In addition, the Vatican objects to the fact that conception is the result of a “technical action” rather “a specific act of the conjugal union.”
But while any couple would prefer to conceive a child without the intervention of doctors, that option is not available for infertile couples.
In those circumstances, it is harsh to say to a couple that they cannot have their own genetic child at all.
It also appears contrary to the broad thrust of the Church’s teaching about marriage and the family as the appropriate context for rearing children.
Dignitas Personae says that new human life should be “generated through an act which expresses the reciprocal love between a man and a woman.”
But if by that the Church is referring to sexual intercourse, then it surely has an unduly narrow view of what kinds of acts can express reciprocal love between a man and a woman.
Taking the several inconvenient and sometimes unpleasant steps required to have a child together by means of IVF can be, and often is, the result of a much more deliberate and reciprocally loving act than sexual intercourse.
A better objection to IVF is that in a world with millions of orphaned or unwanted children, adoption is a more ethical way of having a child.
If that is the argument, however, why should we single out couples who use IVF?
Why not, for example, criticize Jim Bob and Michelle Duggar, the Arkansas couple who recently had their 18th child?
Yet Michelle Duggar was named “Young Mother of the Year” in Arkansas in 2004, when she had already given birth to 14 children.
I haven’t noticed the Vatican telling them that they should be adopting instead of conceiving so many children.
Religious opposition notwithstanding, the use of IVF by infertile couples of normal reproductive age has been widely accepted around the world, and rightly so.
But in countries where the Church’s influence remains strong, IVF’s opponents are fighting back.
Elsewhere, the ethical debate is not about IVF itself, but the limits of its use.
Last November, Rajo Devi, a 70-year-old Indian woman, became the world’s oldest mother, thanks to IVF.
She and her 72 year-old husband have, she says, longed for a child through 55 years of marriage.
Her husband’s sperm appears to have been used, but news reports are unclear about the source of the egg.
Some will find it grotesque to become a mother at an age when most women are grandmothers, but the more significant question is what kind of care such children will have if their parents die or become incapable of rearing them.
Like many people in rural India, Devi lives in an extended family with other relatives, so she is confident that there would be others to bring up her child if necessary.
But, as this example suggests, the impact of parental age on a child’s welfare will vary from one culture to another.
Becoming a mother at 70 is more acceptable for someone living in a joint family than it would be for Western couples living in their own home without close relatives or friends nearby.
LONDON – The year 2016 showed that the durability of liberal democracy can no longer be taken for granted, even in the West.
In fact, Harvard University political scientist Yascha Mounk’s analysis of World Values Survey data shows that, in many Western countries, public confidence in democracy has been declining for quite some time.
The political upheavals of 2016 suggest that many people are frustrated with democratic inaction.
Slow income growth, unemployment, inequality, immigration, and terrorism are supposedly not being tackled decisively enough.
Democratic countries’ political establishments seem to be in a permanent state of torpor, fueling voter demand for strong leaders who promise to smash through political gridlock and sweep away bureaucratic resistance to bold new policies.
These leaders – who assert that they alone can fix their countries’ problems – are often sought, and found, in the corporate world.
Many people regard a successful CEO as someone who can deliver on well-defined objectives, so they conclude that a businessman can solve social problems that a politician cannot.
But this view is misleading, because political leadership is fundamentally different from corporate leadership.
In economists’ parlance, it is the difference between general-equilibrium and partial-equilibrium analysis.
Corporate leaders must deliver for their shareholders, and shouldn’t bother themselves too much with what happens to the rest of society.
If profit maximization requires cutting costs and downsizing, the corporate leader can eliminate jobs and issue severance payments to redundant workers.
What happens to these workers next is a concern for somebody else – namely, the state – to address.
Political leaders, on the other hand, are bound by the principle of “one person, one vote,” and have a responsibility to take care of both the haves and have-nots, the employed and the unemployed alike.
A politician must ensure that unemployed workers have new opportunities, or risk losing their votes.
This is not to say that the CEO’s job is easier; but it is certainly more clearly defined.
Leaders who approach a political task with a corporate mindset are likely to focus more on efficiency than inclusion.
But if their reforms ignore or alienate too many voters, they could be reversed.
As we saw in 2016, Western countries urgently need to find ways to compensate or assist those who have lost out in the current global economy.
This is a painful lesson that post-communist countries learned during the 1990s.
According to “Transition for All,” the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development’s latest Transition Report, the first years of market reforms hurt the vast majority of those countries’ populations.
Interestingly, many of the people who supported these reforms also favored “strong leaders.”
They argued that, because the reforms were unpopular, they needed to be imposed on the public, rather than being impeded by excessively democratic processes.
While some strong leaders managed to implement reforms quickly, the measures benefited only a minority of people, and many of them were eventually reversed.
So, when they are privatized, they become more efficient, but they also shed workers.
This is a positive development from a firm-level, partial-equilibrium perspective; but it may not be if one considers laid-off workers’ wellbeing and the general-equilibrium implications for society.
If privatization displaces too many workers without compensation, a majority of citizens could come to see it as illegitimate, potentially undermining their support for private ownership of productive property.
This is exactly what has happened in more than a few post-communist countries, where privatization has become a dirty word.
In many post-communist countries, the pain they caused created the political conditions for populist strongmen to take over.
And when some of these new leaders reversed the reforms, they also removed institutional checks on their power, in order to make it harder to challenge their decisions.
Once they consolidated their hold on power, they redistributed the country’s wealth to their cronies.
Not surprisingly, income inequality in many of these countries is worse today than it was when they abandoned privatization and other reforms.
This is why democratic institutions are so important: They enable those who have been harmed by reforms to receive compensation.
With “one person, one vote,” the “losers” count as much as the “winners.”
Because truly democratic policies must be inclusive, implementing reforms in a democracy takes time and effort; but the painful process of building broad pro-reform coalitions also ensures that those policies will endure.
In the long run, inclusive reforms stick, and quick and dirty reforms do not.
The tortoise of democracy beats the hare of benevolent dictatorship.
BEIJING – Donald Trump’s election has been greeted around the world with justifiable bewilderment and fear.
His victory – following a fact-free, vicious election campaign – has trashed the brand of American democracy.
But, while Trump is impulsive and occasionally vindictive – a potentially fatal mix in an already fragile world – his election should be a spur to challenge failed ideas and to move beyond excessive reliance on the United States’ inevitably imperfect global leadership.
In many policy areas, what Trump will actually do is unknowable: therein lies the risk.
But in the case of economic policy, one thing is clear: fiscal policy will be loosened.
The exact form of the stimulus will likely be inefficient and regressive: big tax cuts for the rich will exacerbate the inequality that helped fuel Trump’s success.
And his infrastructure spending plans – based on investment tax credits – may have only limited impact.
But the direction of the policy shift – from monetary to fiscal stimulus – makes sense.
Across the developed economies, the prevailing policy mix for the last six years – fiscal tightening and ultra-easy monetary conditions – has resulted in mediocre income growth but big wealth increases for the already rich.
If Trump’s fiscal stimulus provokes a policy rethink elsewhere, some benefit will result.
On trade policy, meanwhile, the risks are probably lower than they appear at first glance.
If Trump really did keep his campaign promises to revise the North American Free Trade Agreement and impose tariffs on many Chinese imports, he could tip the world economy from subpar growth to outright depression.
But a pragmatic version of “America first,” focused on achieving re-election in 2020, is more likely to mean some largely symbolic measures (such as antidumping tariffs on some Chinese steel imports) and abandonment of further trade liberalization initiatives such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.
If that is the extent of Trump’s protectionism, any resulting harm to the global economy will be slight.
While trade liberalization from 1950 to 2000 helped drive global growth, the marginal benefits of further liberalization are small.
In fact, the policy focus should have switched at least a decade ago to the adverse distributional consequences that can result from globalization.
If Trump’s election stimulates a more thoughtful approach to trade liberalization, it may deliver some benefit in this area, too.
So the impact of Trump’s election on the US and global economy might be mildly positive, at least in the short term.
It is his administration’s potential impact on global politics and the natural environment that should worry us far more.
Other countries will have to provide the leadership which America will not – and stand up to the US where necessary.
Few of Trump’s campaign comments can be described as insightful and fair, but he had a point when he suggested that Europe cannot rely on America to defend it if it remains unwilling to make a fair contribution to military capability.
America spends close to 4% of its GDP on defense, and accounts for some 70% of total military spending by all NATO members.
Most European countries fail to meet the Alliance’s 2%-of-GDP target for defense spending, but still expect America to provide security guarantees against, for example, Russian adventurism.
A credible commitment by the United Kingdom, France, and Germany to increase defense spending not just to 2% but to 3% of GDP, would at least reduce the dangerous imbalance at NATO’s core.
Trump’s promise to tear up the Iran deal, by contrast, is an irresponsible and dangerous threat to world peace, which would only strengthen the hand of Iranian hardliners.
But this was not a US-Iran deal; it was negotiated by six leading powers and endorsed by the United Nations.
Those powers should make it clear that they will not re-impose sanctions, and that any US attempt to impose its will through extraterritorial measures – say, using access to dollar clearing systems as a foreign-policy tool – would be countered by coordinated action.
For the UK in particular, this may require a willingness to disagree head-on with US foreign policy in a way that some devotees of our “special relationship” will find uncomfortable.
As for climate change, the election of a man who purports to believe global warming is a Chinese hoax created to damage American business is clearly bad news.
The plummeting price of renewables will drive business investment in low-carbon power, whatever the US does.
Moreover, China’s increasingly strong commitment to limit and then reduce its emissions is more important than any American backsliding, and Germany’s ability to combine stunning export success with rapid growth of renewables proves the absurdity of the claim that building a low-carbon economy threatens competitiveness.
In the US, too, policies in individual states such as California will drive technological progress, regardless of the federal government’s approach.
And the steady accumulation of incontrovertible evidence that global warming is real may slowly align the balance of US political opinion, and perhaps even Trump’s opinion, with the clear majority of Americans who believe that climate change is a major problem.
The rest of the world should redouble its commitment to the 2015 Paris climate agreement: global climate policy does not have to depend on what one US president currently says he thinks.
It would be wrong to ignore the dangers of Trump’s presidency, and uncertainty about what he will do has itself undoubtedly made the world a riskier place already.
For the world’s political leaders, the first response must be to build a world order that is less reliant on US leadership and less vulnerable to the vagaries of American elections.
SINGAPORE – I cannot recall the opening ceremonies at the Athens or Sydney Olympics, maybe because I am a little ambivalent about sports in the first place.
But the opening ceremony for the Beijing Olympic Games did get my attention – and everyone else’s.
Given all the hype, the least anyone could do was to tune in and watch.
So there I was in front of a TV, along with hundreds of millions of other curious people around the world.
But, while I may be in the small minority, I found the ceremony disturbing, to say the least.
It wasn’t only the martial significance of the drummers who started the show.
And besides, they smiled a lot (though I found that disturbing as well).
And I didn’t even know yet about the lip-syncing by the little girl whose voice was actually that of another girl who “wasn’t cute enough,” or the manipulated fireworks displays in the televised production of the whole extravaganza.
It was the number of drummers out there at the start – more than 2,000, all beating drums with their hands and florescent drumsticks in perfect unison – that chilled me.
Thousands more performers followed onto the field to enact one massive choreographed display after another.
Over and over, the Chinese showed how a few simple movements, performed by thousands of synchronized performers, can result in one massive, awesome display.
No other country could have achieved the same dazzling effect with such a massive assemblage of manpower.
One has to ask why it was so important to China to create such an over-the-top display.
Only an authoritarian communist regime could summon the level of mass conformity required in such a production.
The only country that still comes close is North Korea, although it would have to struggle mightily to harness a fraction of the technological sophistication on display in Beijing last week.
What I found particularly disquieting about the opening ceremony in Beijing was the mass sublimation of individuality in the service of the state.
The conformity to script and attention to stage direction by a cast of thousands, while awe inspiring, also represents a negation of the creativity of self-expression.
Of course, there is choreographed order in Western dance and music as well.
But there was something about the Chinese government’s ability to stage-manage so many thousands so precisely that set this show apart from anything undertaken even by Cecil B. DeMille or Las Vegas.
No one would suggest that Zhang Yimou, the Chinese filmmaker who directed the opening night gala, or the other choreographers and artists involved were simply out to score a point for communism.
But, while the Chinese authorities wanted the Olympics to showcase a China that is industrializing, modern, and prosperous, it unwittingly put on a display that recalled the Mao-era mass parades in Tiananmen Square, albeit with much advanced technology and pyrotechnics.
It is not easy to think of such a display as being in line with modern norms.
The Chinese economy may be more market-oriented today than ever before, but, because the Communist Party is still in charge, China remains out of sync with those parts of Asia and the rest of the world where communism has long since come to be viewed as an anachronistic oddity.
CAMBRIDGE – Although the United States economy is in good shape – with essentially full employment and an inflation rate close to 2% – a world of uncertainty makes it worthwhile to consider what could go wrong in the year ahead.
After all, if the US economy runs into serious trouble, there will be adverse consequences for Europe, Japan, and many other countries.
China’s pursuit of territorial claims in the East and South China Seas, and its policies in East Asia more generally, is fueling regional uncertainty.
But within the US, the greatest risk is a sharp decline in asset prices, which would squeeze households and firms, leading to a collapse of aggregate demand.
But conditions are becoming more dangerous as asset prices rise further and further from historic norms.
Equity prices, as measured by the price-earnings ratio of the S&P 500 stocks, are now nearly 60% above their historical average.
The price of the 30-year Treasury bond is so high that it implies a yield of about 2.3%; given current inflation expectations, the yield should be about twice as high.
Commercial real-estate prices have been rising at a 10% annual pace for the past five years.
These inflated asset prices reflect the exceptionally easy monetary policy that has prevailed for almost a decade.
In that ultra-low-interest environment, investors have been reaching for yield by bidding up the prices of equities and other investment assets.
The resulting increase in household wealth helped to bring about economic recovery; but overpriced assets are fostering an increasingly risky environment.
To grasp how risky, consider this: US households now own $21 trillion of equities, so a 35% decline in equity prices to their historic average would involve a loss of more than $7.5 trillion.
A return of real long-term bond yields to their historic level would involve a loss of about 30% for investors in 30-year bonds and proportionately smaller losses for investors in shorter-duration bonds.
Because commercial real-estate investments are generally highly leveraged, even relatively small declines in prices could cause large losses for investors.
A rough rule of thumb implies that every $100 decline in wealth leads to a $4 decline in household spending.
The return of asset prices to historic levels could therefore imply a decline of $400 billion in consumer spending, equal to about 2.5% of GDP, which would start a process of mutually reinforcing declines in incomes and spending leading to an even greater cumulative impact on GDP.
Because institutional investors respond to international differences in asset prices and asset yields, the large declines in US asset prices would be mirrored by similar declines in asset prices in other developed countries.
Those price declines would reduce incomes and spending in other countries, with the impact spread globally through reduced imports and exports.
I must emphasize that this process of asset-price declines and the resulting contraction of economic activity is a risk, not a prediction.
It is possible that asset prices will come down gradually, implying a slowdown rather than a collapse of spending and economic activity.
But the fear of triggering a rapid decline in asset prices is one of the key reasons why the US Federal Reserve is reluctant to raise short-term interest rates more rapidly.
The Fed increased the overnight rate by just 0.25% in December 2015 and is likely to add just another 25 basis points in December 2016.
With the inflation rate close to 2%, the real federal funds rate would still be negative.
Market participants are watching the Fed to judge if and when the process of interest-rate normalization will begin.
Historical experience implies that normalization would raise long-term interest rates by about two percentage points, precipitating substantial corrections in the prices of bonds, stocks, and commercial real estate.
The Fed is therefore trying to tamp down expectations concerning future interest-rate levels, by suggesting that changes in demography and productivity trends imply lower real rates in the future.
But the danger of sharp asset-price declines that precipitate an economic downturn should not be ignored.
China’s President Hu Jintao has just returned home from his first trip to Latin America, where he sought new long-term sources of supplies for his country’s booming economy.
These new ties offer Latin America and the Caribbean both a new market and an example of how a dynamic economy can reduce poverty.
While China may be a ravenous importer of Latin American commodities, it is also a formidable competitor.
Both the public and private sector throughout the region should take immediate measures to face up to this new competition and to work toward cooperative projects with the Chinese.
Ordinary people in Latin America are only now recognizing China’s importance as a global economic player.
But China’s soaring growth, seen in contrast with stagnation in Latin America’s economies, has awakened governments and businessmen across the region.
The World Bank estimates that dire poverty in China, calculated as individual income of $1 per day, has been reduced from about 500 million people at the start of the 1980’s to less than 90 million in 2000.
From 1978 to 2003, annual real GDP growth in China averaged 8.1% while growth in Mexico – the fastest in Latin America, barely reached 1% a year.
Although growing, China’s trade with Latin America and the Caribbean remains small, representing less than 2% of both exports and imports in 2002.
Brazil and Argentina have, for example, significantly increased agricultural exports to China, while Central America and Mexico have seen their imports from China increase dramatically.
This is important because it illustrates the dissimilar regional impact that trade with China has on Latin America and the Carribean, owing to the export of South America’s basic goods, coupled with the growth of Chinese imports into Mexico.
In the 10 years between 1993 and 2003, China’s and Hong Kong’s exports to Mexico rose from 1.12% of total Mexican imports to 5.8%.
Since 2003, China has become Mexico’s most important trading partner after the United States.
Indeed, Mexico’s trade deficit with China reached $9 billion in 2003.
In the second quarter of 2004, Chinese exports to Mexico grew by 67%, while Mexico’s exports to China fell by 1.3 %.
These changes have also had a severe impact on Mexico’s trade with the US.
Although Latin American and Chinese exports to the US have both grown significantly since 1990, China replaced Mexico in 2003 as the second-leading exporter to the US in value terms after Canada.
Mexico’s competition in the US market from China has increased particularly in light manufacturing – mostly clothing and electronics.
In Central America and Mexico clothing production is vitally important – generating 400,000 and 600,000 jobs, respectively – and represents the heart of Central America’s maquiladoras (free trade zones), which account for more than 70% of regional exports to the US.
Losing this sector of the economy to the hyper-competitive Chinese will be a hard hit, as textile exports are often the first step on the development ladder.
With respect to other goods, including computers, Chinese-made products are set to replace Mexican output in overwhelming numbers.
Mexico’s so-called “Silicon Valley South” companies in Guadalajara have, by their own estimates, already lost more than $500 million worth of projects and approximately 20,000 jobs to Asia, especially to China, and this trend will continue in the short term.
If Latin America fails to deal with its new competitor, the peoples of the region will lose jobs and opportunities to develop as they should.
But there are lessons to be learned and advantages to be gained from China if Latin American governments and businesses are willing to think creatively.
NEW YORK – Karl Marx famously wrote that history repeats itself, “the first time as tragedy, the second time as farce.”
Yet when we look around nowadays, we can’t help but wonder whether tragedy will be followed by yet more tragedy.
Here we are, at the centenary of the outbreak of World War I, and we find ourselves surrounded by cascading violence, duplicity, and cynicism of the very sort that brought the world to disaster in 1914.
WWI began with a mindset, one based on the belief that military means could resolve pressing social and political issues in Central Europe.
A century earlier, the German military theorist Carl von Clausewitz had written that war is “a continuation of political intercourse carried on with other means.”
War in the industrial age is tragedy, disaster, and devastation; it solves no political problems.
WWI ended four imperial regimes: the Prussian (Hohenzollern) dynasty, the Russian (Romanov) dynasty, the Turkish (Ottoman) dynasty, and the Austro-Hungarian (Habsburg) dynasty.
The war not only caused millions of deaths; it also left a legacy of revolution, state bankruptcy, protectionism, and financial collapse that set the stage for Hitler’s rise, World War II, and the Cold War.
Territory that was once within the multi-ethnic, multi-state, multi-religious Ottoman Empire is again engulfed in conflict and war, stretching from Libya to Palestine-Israel, Syria, and Iraq.
The Balkan region remains sullen and politically divided, with Bosnia and Herzegovina unable to institute an effective central government and Serbia deeply jolted by the 1999 NATO bombing and the contentious independence of Kosovo in 2008, over its bitter opposition.
The former Russian Empire is in growing turmoil as well, a kind of delayed reaction to the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991, with Russia attacking Ukraine and violence continuing to erupt in Georgia, Moldova, and elsewhere.
In East Asia, tensions between China and Japan – echoes of the last century – are a growing danger.
As was the case a century ago, vain and ignorant leaders are pushing into battle without clear purpose or realistic prospects for resolution of the underlying political, economic, social, or ecological factors that are creating the tensions in the first place.
Its basic strategy has been to send troops, drones, or bombers to any place that would threaten America’s access to oil, harbors Islamic fundamentalists, or otherwise creates problems – say, piracy off the coast of Somalia – for US interests.
Hence, US troops, the CIA, drone missiles, or US-backed armies are engaged in fighting across a region stretching from the Sahel in West Africa, through Libya, Somalia, Yemen, Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan, and beyond.
All of this military activity costs hundreds of thousands of lives and trillions of dollars.
But, rather than solving a single underlying problem, the chaos is growing, threatening an ever-widening war.
For a while, Russia backed international law, rightly complaining that the US and NATO were violating international law in Kosovo, Iraq, Syria, and Libya.
But then President Vladimir Putin took aim at Ukraine, fearing that the country was about to drop into Europe’s pocket.
His government then illegally annexed Crimea and is fighting an increasingly brutal guerrilla war in eastern Ukraine, through proxies and, it now appears, direct engagement of Russian forces.
In this context, the fate of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 is terrifying not only for its brutality, but also in its intimation of a world gone mad.
At the time of this writing, those who aimed and fired the missile remain unknown, though Russian-backed rebels in eastern Ukraine are the most likely culprits.
What is certain, however, is that the violence unleashed by Putin’s war on Ukraine has claimed hundreds of innocent lives and brought the world a step closer to disaster.
The US effectively violates international law by resorting to force without United Nations sanction.
Russia does the same, inflicting death on Ukraine, Georgia, and other neighbors.
The only constants in all of this are the easy resort to violence and the lies that inevitably accompany it.
For starters, we have since lived through two disastrous wars, a Great Depression, and a Cold War.
We have had the opportunity to learn a thing or two about the stupidity and uselessness of organized collective violence.
Second, the next global war, in this nuclear age, would almost surely end the world.
The third major difference is that today, with our wondrous technologies, we have every opportunity to solve the underlying problems of poverty, hunger, displacement, and environmental degradation that create so many dangerous tinderboxes.
The belligerents in Europe and Asia 100 years ago could not turn to the UN Security Council and UN General Assembly, venues where diplomacy, rather than war, can be the true continuation of politics.
We are blessed with the possibility to construct peace through a global institution that was founded to help ensure that global war would never recur.
As citizens of the world, our job now is to demand peace through diplomacy, and through global, regional, and national initiatives to address the scourges of poverty, disease, and environmental degradation.
On this hundredth anniversary of one of the greatest disasters of human history, let us follow tragedy not by farce or more tragedy, but by the triumph of cooperation and decency.
BERLIN – For many centuries, Europe was a continent plagued by wars, famines, and poverty.
They sailed across the Atlantic to North and South America, and to places as far away as Australia, to escape misery and seek a better life for themselves and their children.
All of them were, in the parlance of the current immigration and refugee debate, “economic migrants.”
During the twentieth century, racial persecution, political oppression, and the ravages of two world wars became the predominant causes of flight.
Today, the European Union is one of the world’s richest economic regions.
For decades, an overwhelming majority of Europeans have lived in peaceful democratic states that uphold their fundamental rights.
Europe’s own misery and migration has become a distant (if not entirely forgotten) memory.
And yet many Europeans feel threatened once again, not by Russia, which is aggressively pushing outward against its neighbors, but by refugees and immigrants – the poorest of the poor.
While hundreds of boat people have drowned in the Mediterranean Sea this summer, voices have emerged in almost every corner of Europe, 26 years after the fall of the Iron Curtain, calling for isolation, mass deportations, and the construction of new walls and fences.
Throughout Europe, xenophobia and open racism are running rampant, and nationalist, even far-right parties are gaining ground.
At the same time, this is only the beginning of the crisis, because the conditions inciting people to flee their homelands will only worsen.
And the EU, many of whose members have the world’s largest and best-equipped welfare systems, appears to be overwhelmed by it – politically, morally, and administratively.
No one seriously believes that individual member states – particularly Italy and Greece, the two countries most affected – can overcome the long-term challenges posed by large-scale migration on their own.
But many member states reject a common European effort, a stance that threatens to accelerate the erosion of solidarity within the EU and reinforce the current trend toward disintegration.
There are three distinct causes of the current migration to Europe: the Western Balkans’ continuing economic malaise; the turmoil in the greater Middle East; and Africa’s civil wars and conflicts.
Intensification or expansion of the war in eastern Ukraine would quickly add a fourth cause of flight.
In other words, all of the migration that Europe currently faces is rooted in grave crises in its own neighborhood.
Clearly, the EU must substantially strengthen its Common Foreign and Security Policy, including the European Neighborhood Policy, in order to address more effectively the causes of migration at the source.
Perhaps the only failure more glaring than the member states’ refusal to back such reforms is their own failure to act, not least because it has created a legitimacy vacuum that xenophobic populists are now filling.
Given its foreign-policy weakness, Europe can have only a minor impact on the wars and conflicts ravaging Africa and the Middle East (though its influence, however small, should be used and developed).
Albania and Macedonia are accession candidates; and Bosnia and Herzegovina and Kosovo are potential candidates.
Why the EU has not become more engaged in the Western Balkans – a region where it can make all the difference by supporting economic and administrative modernization and infrastructure projects to link the region to the Union’s industrial centers – remains the secret of the European Commission and the member states.
The absurd result, however, is that citizens from EU candidate countries are subject to asylum procedures, because no possibility for legal immigration to the EU exists for them.
One special case is that of the Roma, a large minority in the Western Balkans whose members often confront vicious discrimination.
The Roma suffered disproportionately after the collapse of communism in 1989, as they worked largely in unskilled industrial jobs that were the first to be cut.
Indeed, many of them – current or future European citizens – have fallen back into deep poverty.
Continuing discrimination against them constitutes a Europe-wide scandal, and the EU, its member states, and candidate countries need to address it.
This summer’s refugee crisis highlights another – and much larger – structural problem in Europe: demography.
In the long run, policymakers will have to explain to their people that they cannot have economic prosperity, a high level of social security, and a population in which pensioners place a growing burden on the economically active.
Europe’s labor force must grow, which is just one reason why Europeans should stop treating migrants as a threat and start viewing them as an opportunity.
COPENHAGEN – Last month, the Doha negotiations, promising freer trade, broke down, ostensibly over a small technicality in safeguard rules.
In reality, the talks collapsed because nobody – not Europe, not the United States, China, India, or the other main developing countries – was willing to take the political short-term hit by offending inefficient farmers and coddled domestic industries in order to create greater long-term benefits for virtually everyone.
After a few exasperated editorials, the world has pretty much dropped the subject and gone back to its usual concerns.
Establishing significantly freer trade would help the world combat almost all of its biggest problems.
For an astonishingly low cost, we could improve education and health conditions, make the poorest people richer, and help everybody become better able to tackle the future.
The economist David Ricardo pointed out in 1817 that both Great Britain and Portugal would benefit if they exploited their comparative advantages.
Portugal could produce wine cheaply, whereas Great Britain could produce cloth much more cheaply than wine.
By selling cloth and buying wine, Great Britain obtains more of both, as does Portugal.
The same holds true today, when countries, doing what they do best, produce more and exchange it for more of all other goods.
Yet today, with international trade talks stalled and protectionist rhetoric rising, we are instead moving toward building bigger trade barriers.
These barriers are supported by deep-pocketed, self-serving corporations and lobby groups, and defended by politicians who are scared that the redistribution of jobs, income, and wealth resulting from freer trade will reduce their chances of remaining in power.
When the Doha trade round was launched shortly after September 11, 2001, there was plenty of international goodwill.
But a recent Financial Times/Harris poll in the US, Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Spain found people nearly three times more likely to say that globalization is negative than positive.
Recently, the Copenhagen Consensus project gathered some of the world’s leading economists to decide how to do the most good for the planet in a world of finite resources.
The panel – including five Nobel laureates – found that one of the single best actions the planet could take would be completing the Doha negotiations.
They based their conclusions on new research for the Copenhagen Consensus project by Australian economist Kym Anderson.
Anderson showed that if developing countries cut their tariffs by the same proportion as high-income countries, and services and investment were also liberalized, the annual global gains could climb to $120 billion, with $17 billion going to the world's poorest countries by 2015.
This is a respectable sum, and certainly a benefit that the international community should try to achieve.
As economies open up, as countries do what they do best, competition and innovation drive up rates of growth.
More competition means that previously sheltered companies must shape up and become more productive, innovating simply to survive.
Having more open economies allows more trade in innovation, so that new companies can almost instantly use smart ideas from around the globe.
Instead of every closed market having to re-invent the wheel, once is enough to get everyone’s economy going.
This means that over time, the advantage of moving toward freer trade grows dramatically bigger: the $120 billion benefit in 2015 grows to many trillions of dollars of annual benefits by the end of the century.
And the benefits would increasingly accrue to the developing world, which would achieve the biggest boosts to growth rates.
We have seen three very visible cases of such growth boosts in three different decades.
South Korea liberalized trade in 1965, Chile in 1974, and India in 1991; all saw annual growth rates increase by several percentage points thereafter.
If we recast these benefits as annual installments, a realistic Doha outcome could increase global income by more than $3 trillion every year throughout this century.
And about $2.5 trillion annually would go to today’s developing countries every year, or $500 a year on average for each individual in the third world, almost half of whom now survive on less than $2 a day.
Freer trade would force some industries to downsize or close, although more industries would expand, and for some people and communities, the transition would be difficult.
Yet the overall benefits of a successful Doha Round would likely be hundreds of times greater than these costs.
It is interesting to contrast global skepticism about free trade with support for expensive, inefficient methods to combat global warming.
Many argue that we should act, even if such action will have no benefit for the next decades, because it will help lessen the impact of global warming by the century’s end.
Moreover, if we could stop global warming (which we can’t), the benefit for future generations would be one-tenth or less of the benefit of freer trade (which we certainly can achieve).
Still, there are few celebrity campaigners calling on politicians to sort out the Doha Round.
Global fear about free trade leaves the planet at risk of missing out on the extraordinary benefits that it offers.
This month has been a bad one for the cause of human rights in Europe, as Serbia was allowed to begin its six-month presidency of the Council of Europe, the Continent’s oldest political body.
With Serbia at the helm, the Council, which aims to promote human rights and the rule of law, is now overseen by a state that thumbs its nose at the Genocide Convention and harbors an indicted war crimes suspect, former Bosnian Serb army chief Ratko Mladic.
Moreover, the European Commission has indicated that it is ready to resume talks aimed at bringing Serbia closer to the European Union as soon as a reform-oriented government is formed in Belgrade.
Earlier this year, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) found Serbia guilty of failing to prevent the massacre of more than 7,000 Bosnian Muslim men in Srebrenica.
The Court also declared that Serbia will remain in violation of the Genocide Convention until it transfers Mladic—who is believed responsible for some of the worst crimes in Europe since the Second World War—to the International Criminal Tribunal for Former Yugoslavia (ICTY) in The Hague.
The EU is understandably eager to support a pro-European government in Serbia, for this might pave the way for Serbia to swallow the prospect of Kosovo’s independence.
That explains why some EU member states are keen to resume the negotiations on a Stabilization and Association Agreement, which were suspended a year ago due to Serbia’s failure to cooperate fully with the ICTY.
The proposed u-turn by the EU means that Mladic’s arrest and transfer to The Hague is no longer a condition for restarting talks.
But an immediate resumption of negotiations amounts to an approach that is all carrot and no stick, damaging the EU’s own credibility.
Indeed, the West has already tried this approach before, with paltry results.
In December 2006, NATO allowed Serbia to join its Partnership for Peace, even though there were still war criminals at large in the country.
This softer approach will prove counterproductive, as it will not strengthen democratic forces in Serbia.
Just last week, caretaker Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica, once hailed by Europe as a great democrat, showed his true colors.
He went so far as to support the election of an extreme nationalist, Tomislav Nikolic, who was an old ally of Milosevic’s, as the Speaker of the Serbian Parliament.
The head of Nikolic’s party, Vojislav Seselj, is in the dock in The Hague facing trial for war crimes.
Although Nikolic soon resigned after a new Serbian government was formed, the cabinet’s composition suggests that the EU might be foolish to expect greater cooperation with the ICTY.
By effectively abandoning conditionality, the EU will be rewarding the most intransigent hard-liners in Serbia – that is, the very people who have opposed the arrest of Mladic for years.
With the ICTY’s closure just one year away, there is a risk that Mladic will never be held accountable.
The effect that the resumption of talks might have on the system of international law is no less chilling.
But the EU must insist on Serbia’s compliance with the ICTY, the ICJ decision, and its own Copenhagen political criteria.
As a signal of their seriousness, European governments should think twice before they accept Serbia’s invitation to attend the Council of Europe’s festive 1,000th meeting in June.
A minute of silence for the victims of unarrested war criminals might be a more appropriate way to pay tribute to the Council’s core values of human rights and justice than attending the party now being planned in Belgrade.
JERUSALEM – The imminent resumption in Washington of direct Israeli-Palestinian peace talks is good news.
But whether these talks will lead to an agreement, let alone within one year as US President Barack Obama hopes, is another matter.
When Obama, two days into his presidency, appointed former Senator George Mitchell as his special envoy to the Middle East, many hoped that within two years his efforts would lead to an agreement between Israel and the Palestinians – and to a comprehensive peace between Israel and all its Arab neighbors.
Whether these exaggerated hopes should be traced to Obama’s inexperience or to hubris – or both – is a moot point: what is clear is that, after 18 months and numerous visits to the region, Mitchell was able to achieve only an agreement in principle by Israel and the Palestinians to start talking to each other.
The problem is that they have been talking to each other now for 17 years, under different Israeli and Palestinian leaders, and under two US Presidents.
To bring them to the negotiating table again is not a breakthrough, but rather an attempt at damage control.
And, while Mitchell’s successful track record in achieving reconciliation in Northern Ireland seemed like an excellent credential for his current job, it may have hindered him in the Middle East.
The conflict in Northern Ireland was always territorial: not even the most radical Irish Republican group ever denied the legitimacy of Great Britain – only its rule over the six northern provinces of what they consider United Ireland.
The crux of the Palestinian-Israeli conflict, by contrast, only partly concerns Israel’s borders.
The Palestinians contest not just the post-1967 occupation of the West Bank; since the United Nations partition plan of 1947 – which called for the establishment of two states, one Jewish and one Arab – Palestinians have refused to recognize Israel’s right to exist, and most Israelis are not convinced that they have totally abandoned that stance.
Being tone-deaf to these fundamental issues, Mitchell started on the wrong foot by initially acceding, with Obama’s encouragement, to the Palestinians’ demand for a freeze on further construction in Israeli settlements on the West Bank prior to the start of negotiations.
A stop to settlement activities in Palestinian territories is a reasonable demand, and the Palestinians could naturally insist on it in the negotiations.
But making a settlement freeze a precondition for negotiations was obviously unacceptable to the Israeli government, which maintained that no preconditions for negotiations should be set.
More than a year was wasted on this, causing, among other things, tensions between Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu’s government and the Obama administration.
With a lack of grace, Netanyahu finally agreed to a temporary freeze – due to expire at the end of September – and eventually the Palestinians, this time under US pressure, relented to open negotiations without an explicit Israeli assurance that the freeze would be continued.
Even Israelis who do not agree with Netanyahu’s hard-line positions didn’t like to see their prime minister treated by the US as if he were the leader of Upper Volta.
Indeed, he did, after all, announce last year that contrary to his Likud Party’s previous position, he was now willing to accept a two-state solution – a position that is still anathema to many Likud members, as well to at least three of the smaller parties in his government coalition.
Now that the talks are to begin, will they achieve anything substantial, or will the summit in Washington merely be another photo opportunity, like President George W. Bush’s Annapolis summit in 2007?
Only an unreconstructed optimist would give the talks more than a 50% chance of succeeding.
The reasons are more immediate than the intractable character of Middle East peace-making.
Even if Netanyahu is willing to bow to realism, some of his coalition partners might leave his government.
On the Palestinian side, Mahmoud Abbas’s Palestinian Authority lost control in 2006 of the Gaza Strip – now ruled by an illegitimate Hamas-led government – and thus cannot speak anymore for all Palestinians.
With more than 600 Palestinians killed in Gaza since Hamas’s violent putsch, making peace among the Palestinians may be as difficult as making peace between them and Israel.
Moreover, before Israeli-Palestinian talks broke down two years ago, the previous Israeli government, under Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni, negotiated for two years with the Palestinian Authority.
This was the most moderate Israeli government conceivable, and the same can be said about the Fatah movement controlling the Palestinian Authority.
Yet, after dozens of meetings, public and private, the two sides failed to reach an agreement.
Even the most moderate leaders on both sides could not agree on the core issues of the conflict: borders, settlements, Jerusalem, and the fate of 1947-1948 Palestinian refugees and their descendants.
Both sides had an immediate stake in reaching an agreement: for Olmert, an agreement might have rescued his position as prime minister, and it would have been a trump card for Abbas in Fatah’s de facto civil war with Hamas.
The failure to reach agreement under such apparently auspicious conditions does not bode well for the coming talks.
But Netanyahu has said that once negotiations start, “we will surprise everyone,” and the Palestinians have gone further than ever before in building the institutions needed for national independence.
Even a lapsed optimist can see that this time the chances for reconciliation just might be better after all.
Now they face a form of discrimination unseen in Europe since World War II: group evictions and expulsions from several European democracies of men, women, and children on the grounds that they pose a threat to public order.
Last week, France began to carry out plans to expel all non-French Roma, implicating them as a group in criminal activity, without any legal process to determine whether individuals have committed any crime or pose a threat to public order.
These French actions follow Italy’s “security package” of 2008, which described so-called “nomads” as a threat to national security and imposed emergency legislation leading to expulsions of non-Italian Roma.
But the expulsion of EU citizens on the basis of ethnicity as a proxy for criminal activity is a violation of EU directives on racial discrimination and the right to move freely from one EU member-state to another.
Indeed, it is a firmly established legal principle that crime should be addressed by a determination of individual guilt before a court of law.
Moreover, convicted criminals are not routinely deported if they are citizens of another EU member state.
Instead, European law requires an individual determination that deportation is necessary and proportionate to the crime committed, as well as consideration of other circumstances (such as the strength of the individual’s ties to the community).
Of course, European societies should not tolerate criminality and anti-social behavior.
But no ethnic group monopolizes such pathologies, and all people should be equal before the law.
Since WWII, Europeans have found it unacceptable to subject any group to collective punishment or mass expulsion on the basis of ethnicity, so, in casting aside fundamental rights in the name of security, rounding up Roma sets a worrying precedent.
By contrast, the French government is right to call for measures to improve employment and development opportunities for Roma in their countries of origin (primarily Bulgaria and Romania in this case), which would reduce the incentives and pressure for them to move to other countries.
In response to France’s position, the Swedish government also called for concerted EU action to foster Roma inclusion.
Roma want to and can integrate if they are given the opportunity, as my foundation’s programs have shown.
Most Roma share the aspirations of the majority populations: a home with adequate services, a decent education for their children, jobs that enable them to provide for their families, and to interact with the majority in their society.
It is because they face appalling discrimination and deprivation at home that they continue to migrate across Europe.
The EU must recognize that the pan-European nature of this problem demands a comprehensive and effective strategy for Roma inclusion.
Primary responsibility for safeguarding the rights and well-being of all citizens lies with EU member states.
Policies and programs to promote inclusion in employment, education, health care, and housing must be implemented at the local and national levels.
But the EU has a vital role to motivate, coordinate, financially assist, and monitor such efforts through an EU-level plan.
In 2009, the EU endorsed the principle of “explicit but not exclusive targeting” for Roma, and the European Commission allowed structural funds to be used to cover housing interventions in favour of marginalized communities, with a particular focus on Roma.
This is a welcome step and “explicit but not exclusive targeting” should be extended to education, health care, and employment.
Most importantly, the rules guiding how structural funds are spent should be changed to allow their use for health and education from early childhood, rather than only for job training.
The Commission’s Europe 2020 initiative sets specific targets for raising school completion rates and employment levels for all EU citizens.
In both of these areas, Roma fall so far behind their fellow citizens that targeted measures to close the gap should be an integral part of the Europe 2020 plan.
The greatest divide between the Roma and majority populations is not one of culture or lifestyle – as is so often portrayed by the media – but poverty and inequality.
Segregated housing has led to huge shantytowns and settlements lacking sanitation and other basic conditions essential to a life with dignity.
The plight of so many millions of Roma in the twenty-first century makes a mockery of European values and stains Europe’s conscience.
The plight of the Roma is not just a short-term security problem that can be addressed by draconian measures to move people forcibly from one member state to another.
Not only does this undermine European values and legal principles, but it fails to address the root causes of the problem.
As Europe’s largest ethnic minority, Roma inside the EU comprise the youngest and fastest-growing demographic segment of the population.
By 2020, for example, young Roma will make up one-third of the new entrants to the workforce in Hungary.
This is a matter of human rights and basic values, and it is vital to peace and cohesion in societies across Europe.
With its ten new members, the European Union comprises 25 countries and 453 million citizens.
In light of the fact that during the past millennium the EU’s members fought countless wars with each other, and that for forty five years a cold war split the continent into two hostile blocs, today’s Europe is a success of monumental historical significance.
First, it is a guarantee of peace: war is now technically impossible between the Union’s interlinked member countries.
The Germans and the French, who 60 years ago loved each other about as much as Serbs and Bosnians do today, are now a married couple.
Catholics and Protestants in Ireland were killing each other for a century, but now that they are in the EU, they have recognized the idiocy of their conflict and the inevitability of reconciliation.
Hungarians and Romanians, after nine centuries of hatred and wars, are embarking on the same process.
Greece has just decided to support the opening of negotiations for Turkey’s entry into the EU in the next twelve years.
The Union has also been a bearer of prosperity, because it is an effective mechanism for lagging members to surmount long-standing barriers to development.
Ireland and Greece, once the two poorest countries of Europe have surged economically, with Greece coming close to the European average and Ireland having already taken its place among the richest.
In less than two years, this will become a reality for Bulgaria and Romania, while negotiations are beginning with Croatia and Turkey.
For each of these countries, membership will mean a stable peace with its neighbors and reconciliation at home, as well as accelerated economic growth.
All of this entails a certain amount of instability, particularly if expansion is driven by negotiations among governments, rather than by democratic choices.
And, lo and behold, France, which is scheduled to ratify the Constitution by a referendum on May 29, gives the impression of wanting to vote against it.
Although every member nation has played its part in integrating Europe, France has without doubt been the country that provided most of the ideas and master builders.
In France, as elsewhere in Europe, there have always existed unbridled nationalists, the “sovereignists” who say no to Europe in the name of defending the nation.
But whether they belong to the extreme right or the communist left, they represent barely 20% of the electorate.
Over and above that, two factors explain the bizarre phenomenon captured by recent opinion polls in France.
The first is that the French have accounts to settle with their president and the government.
Jacques Chirac was re-elected president with 82% of the vote because of the menace from the extreme right.
But Chirac acted as if his mandate had been unequivocal and put in place one of the most conservative governments France has seen for half a century.
“Let’s make the poor pay” is his fiscal order of the day.
It smacks of usurpation and is inciting many of the French to vote their anger.
The other factor is that France, like the rest of the world, suffers from an ill-managed form of globalization.
As a result, France suffers from growing inequality, high and still-rising unemployment, constant corporate restructurings entailing layoffs, threats to public services and social welfare programs, and a general feeling of insecurity.
The world has undergone massive economic deregulation, prescribed by the monetarist doctrine supported by the conservative forces dominant in the developed countries of North America, Europe, and the Far East.
This economic tsunami has come to us from the United States – there is nothing in it for Europe, but the right-wing forces in all our countries, which have coalesced into the majority that governs Europe, have rallied to its support.
It is the desire to reject this state of affairs that, above all else, explains the “No” many French people want to shout.
Only Europe as a whole, focused politically on the idea of better regulation, is big enough to block the neo-liberal tsunami.
But it needs great doctrinal clarity, a firm political will, and a constitution.
Indeed, rejection of the EU Constitution is a sure way to kill European dynamism and weaken Europe’s ability to defend itself.
The French people still have time to pull themselves together – and opinion polls suggest that they are beginning to do it.
SANTIAGO – The late MIT economist Rüdiger Dornbusch used to tell his students in the 1980s that there are four kinds of countries: rich, poor, Japan, and Argentina.
On April 24, the yield on ten-year US Treasury bonds broke 3% for the first time since 2014.
On the same day, investors began dumping Argentine pesos and seeking the security of a surging dollar.
To stabilize its currency at a much-depreciated rate, Argentina had to jack up interest rates to 40% and seek help from the International Monetary Fund.
Now is the time to assess what went wrong, and what the country can – and must – do to prevent instability from returning.
Compared to the crooks and demagogues who preceded him in office (not long ago, one was filmed stashing millions in cash behind the altar of a local monastery), President Mauricio Macri and his team of well-trained technocrats are a massive improvement.
Because none of Macri’s team had previously held national office, analysts and investors initially underestimated their political skills.
Until now, Macri has shown he can be an able administrator and an astute politician.
It all began with an ill-fated press conference last December, at which the 2018 inflation target was relaxed from 8-12% to 15%.
The new figure was a reasonable admission that the earlier target could not be reached without wrecking the economy.
But having Macri’s chief of staff seated at the table during the announcement, alongside the economic team, raised concerns of political meddling.
Two subsequent interest-rate cuts, totaling 150 basis points, did not help credibility.
Argentina’s monetary policy is based on inflation targeting and a floating exchange rate.
But in late March, concerned by the effect of a weakening currency on inflation, the central bank once again began intervening, and appeared to be fixing the exchange rate at around 20 pesos per dollar.
Mindful of a long history of failed attempts at economic “shock therapy,” Macri decided to fix the fiscal mess he inherited only gradually.
He cut fuel and power subsidies and some unnecessary expenditures, but also decided – quite reasonably – to reduce export taxes in order to spur growth.
The result is that the fiscal deficit has fallen, but still hovers at 5.5% of GDP.
Critics claim that the fiscal adjustment was too slow for comfort, yet markets seem unconcerned that in neighboring Brazil the headline budget gap is 8% of GDP.
Yes, Argentina’s current-account deficit exceeds 5% of GDP, while Brazil’s external position is nearly balanced.
But that only shows that Argentina’s private sector is investing what it saves, while Brazil’s private firms are deleveraging fast and investing very little, if at all.
In Argentina, gradual fiscal adjustment seemed like a plausible strategy until US interest rates spiked and the dollar surged.
With concerns over emerging-market creditworthiness making a comeback, Argentina and Turkey were first in line to take the hit.
But while the Turkish government has dithered and the situation there continues to deteriorate, Argentine authorities bit the bullet and took decisive action.
Going to the IMF imposes a political cost, but it had to be done: only with sufficient firepower can Argentina convince investors that debts will be paid and the currency will not keep plunging.
The sharp rise in domestic interest rates was necessary not only to stabilize the currency, but also to make it attractive for investors to roll over large amounts of peso bonds coming due in early May.
The carry trade today is very attractive, especially for longer-maturity securities, because the break-even point occurs at the most depreciated real exchange rate in decades.
If the Argentine peso turns out to be stronger than that in real terms, which it probably will, investors stand to profit handsomely.
So the smart money right now is betting on the peso, not against it.
But interest rates at 40% cannot be sustained for long without harming credibility.
Markets must be persuaded that a gradual reduction in rates is both plausible and sustainable.
To avoid an unsustainable snowball, the central bank is likely to lower interest rates gradually after the details of the IMF package are announced.
One bit of good news is that rollover risk on domestic bonds is not nearly as high as some newspaper headlines have suggested, because the lion’s share is held by local banks and public-sector entities that have large and stable liquidity needs.
But it also must understand that too abrupt a fiscal adjustment can cause a political backlash that jeopardizes the credibility of the overall package.
The Peronist opposition, until now weakened and divided, is hoping to make a comeback by triggering protests against budget cuts and additional energy-price adjustments.
The Fund, precisely because it is an international institution that is above local politics, should be careful not to give one of the competing sides all the ammunition it needs in the run-up to the October 2019 presidential election.
In addition to some additional fiscal tightening, the Fund should insist that the authorities clarify the rules of the exchange-rate regime as the emergency recedes.
Occasional interventions when the exchange rate is severely misaligned are not uncommon under inflation targeting and floating rates.
The success of a liberal reformist approach in Argentina matters far beyond the country’s borders.
Populists of the right and the left, some with authoritarian leanings, lead opinion polls in Brazil and Mexico ahead of presidential elections in both countries later this year.
With populists already holding power in the US, Europe, and Asia, their return in Latin America’s two most populous countries would have global ramifications.
With the right policies and strong support from the international community, Argentina can show that another way is possible.
CAMBRIDGE – When Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi invited US President Barack Obama to attend his country’s Republic Day ceremonies earlier this year, it signaled an important change in relations between the world’s two biggest democracies.
Ever since the 1990s, three American administrations have tried to improve bilateral relations, with mixed results.
While annual trade between the countries has soared during this period, from $20 billion to more than $100 billion, annual US-China trade is worth six times more, and the political relationship has had ups and downs.
By definition, any alliance with a superpower is unequal; so efforts to establish close ties with the United States have long run up against India’s tradition of strategic autonomy.
On the contrary, India’s success is an important US interest, and several factors promise a brighter future for the bilateral relationship.
The most important factor is the acceleration in India’s economic growth, which the International Monetary Fund projects will exceed 7.5% through 2020.
For decades, India suffered from what some called the “Hindu rate of economic growth”: a little more than 1% per year.
It might more properly have been called a 1930s British socialist rate of growth.
After independence in 1947, India adopted an inward-looking planning system that focused on heavy industry.
Market-oriented reforms in the early 1990s changed that pattern, and annual growth accelerated to 7% under the Congress party, before slumping to 5%.
Since the 2014 general election brought Modi’s Bharatiya Janata Party to power, the government has reversed the slowdown.
India has an emerging middle class of several hundred million, and English is an official language spoken by some 50 to 100 million.
Building on that base, Indian information industries are able to play a major global role.
Moreover, with a population of 1.2 billion people, India is four times larger than the US, and likely to surpass China by 2025.
Its sheer scale will be increasingly important not only to the global economy, but also to balancing China’s influence in Asia and managing global issues such as climate change, public health, and cyber security.
India also has significant military power, with an estimated 90-100 nuclear weapons, intermediate-range missiles, 1.3 million military personnel, and annual military expenditure of nearly $50 billion (3% of the world total).
And, in terms of soft power, India has an established democracy, an influential diaspora, and a vibrant popular culture with transnational influence.
Bollywood produces more films every year than any other country, out-competing Hollywood in parts of Asia and the Middle East.
Population alone is not a source of power unless those human resources are developed, and India has lagged well behind China in terms of literacy and economic growth.
Despite its progress, around a third of India’s population lives in conditions of acute poverty, making the country home to a third of the world’s poor.
India’s $2 trillion GDP is only a fifth of China’s $10 trillion, and a ninth of America’s $17.5 trillion (measured at market exchange rates).
Likewise, India’s annual per capita income of $1,760 is just one-fifth that of China.
Even more striking, while 95% of the Chinese population is literate, the proportion for India is only 74% – and only 65% for women.
A symptom of this problem is India’s poor performance in international comparisons of universities, with none ranked among the world’s top 100.
India’s high-tech exports are only 5% of its total exports compared to 30% for China.
India is unlikely to develop the power to become a global challenger to the US in the first half of this century.
Indeed, even in terms of soft power, a recent study by the Portland Consultancy in London placed India outside the top 30 countries.
China ranked 30th, and the US came in third, behind the United Kingdom and Germany.
Nonetheless, India has considerable assets that already affect the balance of power in Asia.
While India and China signed agreements in 1993 and 1996 that promised a peaceful settlement of the border dispute that led them to war in l962, the issue has heated up again, following Chinese actions in recent years.
India and China are fellow members of the BRICS (along with Brazil, Russia, and South Africa).
While Indian officials are often discreet in public about relations with China, and wisely want bilateral trade and investment to grow, their security concerns remain acute.
As part of the group of Asian countries that will tend to balance China, India has already begun to strengthen its diplomatic relations with Japan.
It would be a mistake to cast the prospects for an improved US-India relationship solely in terms of China’s rising power.
So is the open approach taken by India and Brazil on issues such as governance of the Internet, at a time when Russia and China are seeking more authoritarian control.
No one should expect an Indian-American alliance any time soon, given historical Indian public opinion.
But one can predict a relationship in the coming years that will be both sui generis and stronger.
BERKELEY – This month marks the fourth anniversary of the May 2010 financial rescue of Greece.
Previously, the idea that a eurozone member would seek emergency assistance from the International Monetary Fund, along with the European Commission and the European Central Bank, was unthinkable.
Four years later, European officials are assuring everyone that the crisis is over.
The IMF has raised its forecast for eurozone growth this year to 1.2%.
Even Greece is forecast to grow by a modest but not insignificant 0.6%.
Last month, Portugal was able to issue ten-year bonds at 3.57%.
Even Greece has been able to sell five-year bonds at rates below 5%.
Clearly, the supposed experts who predicted the imminent disintegration of the eurozone have been proved wrong.
But it is equally likely that those now declaring that the crisis is over will be proved wrong as well.
If we have learned one thing from the last four years, it is that the European Union lacks the capacity to act decisively.
With 28 member countries, decision-making processes are tedious and time-consuming.
Common interests are difficult to define, making burden-sharing agreements difficult to reach.
Ireland, Portugal, Spain, and Greece have made considerable progress in lowering their unit labor costs to 1999 levels relative to Germany.
The problem is that 1999 levels are not enough, because producers now have China and other emerging markets with which to contend.
Italy and France, meanwhile, have made considerably less progress on improving their international competitiveness.
Nor is it clear where the crisis countries will find the demand that they need.
But now that growth in emerging markets has slowed, their export markets are weakening.
The ECB, for its part, continues to do too little to support demand.
If it finally turns to quantitative easing in June, it will take only baby steps down this path, because ECB President Mario Draghi and his team remain reluctant to embrace the kind of radical measures that would shock their political masters.
On the budgetary front, the new French and Italian prime ministers, Manuel Valls and Matteo Renzi, respectively, have proposed cutting taxes for low-paid workers and their employers.
This is a positive step toward addressing the plight of those who have suffered the most from the unemployment crisis.
But Valls and Renzi also plan to cut spending to prevent their budget deficits from rising, which means that their initiatives will not boost demand.
Remarkably, the European Banking Authority’s latest stress test for the eurozone’s banks does not contemplate the possibility of deflation in its adverse scenario.
The implication is clear: The banks’ capital shortfall will be understated, and the amount of new capital they will be required to raise will be inadequate.
If the goal is to restore confidence and get the banking system firing on all cylinders, this is not how to go about it.
And everyone knows that Europe’s much vaunted banking union is deeply flawed.
It harmonizes deposit-insurance coverage but does not provide a common deposit-insurance fund.
The associated resolution fund will possess only €55 billion ($76.6 billion) of its own capital, whereas European bank liabilities are on the order of €1 trillion.
Finally, there is that pesky matter of public debt, which is still 90% of eurozone GDP.
European officials propose to work this down to their target of 60% over a couple of decades.
Its banking union may be flawed, but at least it exists, and over time those flaws can be fixed.
The stress tests may be flawed, but at least they are better than Europe’s two previous attempts.
ECB action this summer may underwhelm, but at least the eurozone’s monetary-policy officials will do something.
The eurozone will not collapse this year, but its troubles are far from over.
COPENHAGEN – A girl born in South Asia or sub-Saharan Africa faces a cruel double burden.
She will grow up in a region beset by poverty, disease, war or famine.
Although more attention is being given to gender issues, inequality persists in every culture, country, and continent.
A new study for the Copenhagen Consensus project shows that eliminating this disparity is an investment with high payoffs.
Despite global interest in education for all, many girls in poor countries continue to be denied basic education; right from the start, they are disadvantaged.
Particularly in South Asia and sub-Saharan Africa, cultural norms and economic hardships stop parents from sending their daughters to school or from keeping them in school for as long as they enroll their sons.
An obvious solution is to build more schools in places where girls and boys must be educated separately.
In poor Muslim countries like Pakistan, Yemen, and Morocco, single-sex schooling is the norm, but many rural areas can afford only one public school, which is usually set aside for boys.
In theory, about half of the education gap in these areas could be closed by building girls’ schools.
Instead, policymakers must find ways to strengthen the incentives for parents to send their daughters to school.
In countries where the family’s cost of schooling girls is lowered either by a no-fee policy or by a stipend for girls who enroll in school, girls’ enrollment rate increases.
The experiences of these few countries lead us to propose a system whereby mothers are paid if their school-age daughters attend school regularly from the 3rd to the 9th grade.
This would increase girls’ enrollment and also put money into women’s hands – important because studies show that money given to women is more likely to provide positive nutritional and health benefits for their children than money given to men.
Covering every eligible girl in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia for a year would cost $6 billion.
Benefits from increased future wages and the reduction in health-care use would be between three and 26 times higher.
Pregnancy is one of the most vulnerable times for poor women; 99% of the 529,000 women who die annually from pregnancy-related complications live in developing countries.
Severe malnutrition and the absence of prenatal care during pregnancy put both mother and child at serious risk.
Spending $3.9 billion on family planning and maternal health initiatives, such as provision of emergency contraception in sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, could avert 1.4 million infant deaths and 142,000 pregnancy-related deaths in women.
Making reproductive services available to women who cannot afford to pay their way can help prevent these deaths.
But such services must not shy away from promoting and providing modern contraceptive methods to avoid unwanted pregnancies.
Nearly 20% of women in developing countries report that they would like to stop having more children but are not using any form of contraception or family planning, possibly because reproductive services are not available.
Delaying marriage and childbearing allows them to gain more education and perhaps more earning opportunities, as well as improved health, education, and labor market success for their future children – benefits worth ten times more than the cost of providing reproductive services.
Other tools, aside from schooling, can help women improve their income-earning ability.
Microfinance institutions, such as Bangladesh’s Grameen Bank, play a vital role in allowing self-employed women to build profitable businesses.
Small loans empower women by giving them more control over household assets and resources, more autonomy and decision-making power, and greater access to participation in public life.
Women are more likely than men to meet regular repayments and to spend their earnings on children’s health and education.
Policymakers should continue to facilitate the rollout of microfinance programs.
Studies show that each dollar loaned by a microfinance institution increases household expenditure by almost 10% in the first year, and that the benefits will continue for another 30 years.
Benefits are estimated to end up about six times higher than the costs.
Though women have the right to vote in almost every country, gender inequalities in political representation remain large.
Greater female representation may not necessarily lead to more emphasis on “female” policy priorities, but in India, village councils with gender quotas for village chiefs have higher levels of safe drinking water, better immunization coverage and roads, and less bribery.
There may be some losses from electing women because they tend to have less political experience than men, but the record in India suggests that if it took 20 years to establish a 30% share of women in local positions in other countries, the benefits would be at least double the costs of achieving this.
Being a woman need not and should not be among the greatest challenges of life.
LONDON – The three great Theresas in history are all saints.
The most recent to be canonized was Mother Teresa, a tireless charity worker and controversial campaigner for the poor; the first was Teresa of Ávila, one of the Catholic Church’s most dynamic and powerful personalities during the sixteenth century.
And in the nineteenth century, Thérèse of Lisieux spoke to animals, cultivated gardens, performed good works, and became known as the Little Flower.
British Prime Minister Theresa May is, at times, as philanthropic as Mother Teresa, as ambitious as Teresa of Ávila, and as modest as the Little Flower.
Like the Little Flower, May is so discreet that even many members of her own party have doubts about what she actually believes.
She has pandered to America’s toxic president, Donald Trump, and courted Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, who is rapidly turning one of the world’s most strategically important countries into a grim Anatolian backwater of intolerance.
Both gestures have eclipsed even former British Prime Minister David Cameron’s kowtowing to Chinese President Xi Jinping during Xi’s visit to the United Kingdom in 2015.
By invoking Article 50 of the Treaty of Lisbon, her government has now pushed Britain’s narrow Brexit referendum decision past the point of no return with minimal controversy, while remaining extraordinarily popular.
Of course, very little has actually happened in the nine months since the referendum took place: no concrete steps have been taken; and staunch Brexit opponents such as Work and Pensions Secretary Damian Green and Minister of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs Alan Duncan are still members of the government.
Investors are apparently banking on the fact that nothing significant will happen for at least another year, because Europe will be in the throes of its own elections in France, Germany, and probably Italy.
Incumbent European governments will not want to risk empowering their populist right-wing rivals by accommodating British bluster.
On the other hand, the Dutch populist avatar Geert Wilders recently suffered an electoral defeat, relative to what many expected.
And in France, a mainstream candidate such as Emmanuel Macron or François Fillon will likely win the presidency in a run-off against the far-right National Front’s Marine Le Pen, unless she shrewdly poses as a moderate or a socialist welfare-statist “patriot.”
After that, German voters will either reelect Chancellor Angela Merkel, or give the job to the pro-EU Social Democrat Martin Schulz.
And the next Italian leader will surely be anyone but Beppe Grillo, the eccentric Five Star Movement leader.
When the election dust finally settles, a phony war between Britain and the European Union will ensue.
In a replay of British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher’s own fights with Europe three decades ago, both sides will huff and puff, threaten to withdraw from the talks, and then reach a last-minute compromise.
Ultimately, the deal that emerges will most likely resemble Norway’s membership in the European Economic Area, but it will be labeled “bespoke” for Britain.
In this scenario, the UK’s access to the European market will be similar to what it has today, with somewhat more control over migration from the EU and an end to deference to EU institutions such as the European Court of Justice.
In exchange, the UK will forfeit most of its influence in determining how the European single market operates.
By accepting such a compromise, May would certainly fulfill her promise to those who voted for Brexit, and possibly unite the different camps within her own Conservative Party.
If European countries do not lurch to the right, and if Schulz emerges as Germany’s leader – and the EU’s de facto president – the EU will have less tolerance for British demands.
By appealing to Trump and Erdoğan, May’s current strategy seems to be geared toward appeasing right-wing Brexiteers and Euroskeptics.
But if she concedes too much to them, she could make it impossible to reach a final agreement with Europe.
Either way, Europhobes such as Liam Fox, May’s trade secretary, will denounce any deal as a Cameron-style sellout, and push for a “pure,” off-the-cliff Brexit.
This would entail acceding to World Trade Organization rules – or maybe no rules at all – with respect to Europe, which would put Britain at a significant disadvantage.
The fact that May is facing the weakest domestic opposition imaginable may actually compound her difficulties.
Labour Party leader Jeremy Corbyn is sticking with his old far-left extremism, except on immigration, where he is compromising one of Labour’s most sacred principles to curry favor with the shrinking electorate once claimed by Oswald Mosley and other far-right leaders, and now represented by the UK Independence Party.
Corbyn, like a true Leninist, believes that any strategy is acceptable in the pursuit of power.
In a career spanning nearly 35 years, he has always taken the long view.
He now seems to think that he could emerge, Trump-like, as an unexpected victor in 2020, especially if Brexit sends the economy into a downward spiral.
Barring that scenario, he can at least try to sabotage what he sees as a capitalist free-market plot originating in the EU.
But with even trade union leaders such as Unite’s Len McCluskey now criticizing Corbyn, a more moderate replacement could be found.
If former Shadow Chancellor Ed Balls or former Foreign Secretary David Miliband takes the reins, Labour might have a real chance at victory in 2020.
Still, May could frustrate Labour by holding an election this fall, which would strengthen her position vis-à-vis her party’s Europhobic fringe and whoever governs Europe next year.
For now, she seems to have ruled out calling an early election ahead of the Brexit negotiations.
But, equipped with a popular mandate of her own, and with the vision, strength, and courage of her three namesakes, she could secure a deal with Europe that serves both Britain and the cause of global stability.
WASHINGTON, DC – With Donald Trump’s inauguration as president of the United States fast approaching, the strangest – even craziest – post-election transition in US history is about to come to an end.
This period has provided a clear demonstration of how unpredictable life with President Trump will be.
A president-elect typically uses the transition time to make cabinet choices and to study up on the issues he will soon confront, but keeps quiet on policy until he’s been sworn into office.
But Trump has only paid lip service to the hallowed principle that the US has just one president at a time.
Just a couple of weeks after becoming president-elect, Trump took to Twitter to suggest that the British government name Nigel Farage, who had led the successful Brexit campaign, as the United Kingdom’s ambassador to the US.
Trump may have been unaware that governments choose their own ambassadors, and that the esteemed Sir Kim Darroch was already ensconced in the British embassy in Washington, DC.
Soon thereafter, Trump took a congratulatory call from Taiwanese President Tsai Ing-wen – a sharp departure from the “one China” policy that presidents, Democratic and Republican alike, have upheld for more than 40 years.
China strongly condemned the move – and Trump’s subsequent tweets questioning America’s commitment to the one China policy.
Trump’s foreign-policy meddling reached its apex – at least so far – in late December, when he tried to interfere with President Barack Obama’s administration’s decision to abstain from voting on a United Nations Security Council resolution condemning Israel for continuing to build settlements in occupied Palestinian territories.
Traditionally, the US had vetoed such resolutions, though for some time now, administrations had taken the position that such settlements blocked progress on a two-state solution for the Israel-Palestine conflict.
Trump had already indicated that he wanted a closer relationship with the government of Israeli Prime Minister Binyamin Netanyahu, who backs the settlements.
So he took it upon himself to call Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi and urged him to delay bringing up the resolution (it was postponed for only a day).
Trump also strongly criticized the Obama administration’s decision not to veto the resolution.
And he named as his ambassador to Israel his antitrust lawyer, a man with no foreign-policy experience, who is a fervent backer of the settlements.
Yet perhaps the weirdest elements of the transition have been the manifestations of Trump’s apparent fondness for Russian President Vladimir Putin.
Trump says that he’s simply trying a new approach, after years of cold, if not hostile, US-Russia relations.
Journalists have been trying to track down the origin of Trump’s softness toward Putin.
A small eruption occurred over news reports on January 10 that the intelligence agencies recently informed Trump and Obama of uncorroborated allegations that Russian intelligence agencies have compromising information on Trump’s business and personal behavior.
While the validity of these claims remains very much in question, it’s clear that the subject of Trump’s relationship with Putin isn’t going away anytime soon.
In any case, Trump’s attitude toward Putin has worrisome implications.
Does it mean that Trump will consent to Putin’s ambition to dominate Ukraine?
How would Trump – who questioned the value of NATO during the campaign – react if Putin committed aggression against one of the Baltic states, NATO allies toward which he’s already made threatening gestures?
One manifestation of Trump’s predilection for giving Putin the benefit of the doubt was in his rejection of the finding of 17 US intelligence agencies, issued last October, that Russia was meddling in the presidential election.
After the election, the intelligence agencies described the actions Russia had taken: hacking into the email accounts of the Democratic National Committee and of Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman; arranging for embarrassing emails to be made public through Wikileaks; and purveying “fake news.”
Russia’s goal, the agencies declared, had been to damage Clinton’s campaign.
Angered by the prospect that anyone would consider his election invalid – which no serious person alleged – he ratcheted up his attacks on the CIA, the FBI, and the Office of the Director of National Intelligence (which coordinates the findings of the various intelligence agencies).
Numerous members of Congress from both parties declared that it was unjust for Trump to malign the entire intelligence community – dedicated government workers, many of whom take on highly dangerous assignments.
Moreover, some commented, it was unwise: not only would Trump need to rely on these agencies in future crises; they’re filled with skilled infighters who know how to use strategic leaks.
In time, Trump’s disdainful tweets about the intelligence agencies became a crisis for him.
When National Intelligence Director James Clapper testified in an open hearing of the Senate Armed Services Committee on December 6, including on the finding that Putin himself had directed the attempt to affect the US election, his testimony met with bipartisan approval.
Finally, Trump begrudgingly agreed to be briefed by intelligence agencies on Russia’s role in the election.
Urged by advisers to extricate himself from his lonely position on Russia’s meddling, Trump stated after the briefing that he has “tremendous respect” for the work of the intelligence agencies and acknowledged that Russia – but also other countries, he added, such as China – continually try to attack America’s cyber infrastructure.
Trump also insisted that “there was absolutely no effect on the outcome of the election,” even though the intelligence agencies had made no attempt to determine the actual impact of Russia’s unprecedented meddling in the 2016 presidential election.
Trump’s habit of tweeting at all hours on all manner of subjects, has those in Washington, DC, including Republicans, on edge.
The most worrisome aspect of this strangest of transitions is what it foretells about what will happen when Trump gains the full power of the presidency.
NEW YORK – One of Iraq’s only working filmmakers, Oday Rasheed – whose brilliant film 2005 Underexposure followed a group of characters in Baghdad after the United States-led invasion in 2003, and whose new film Qarantina is now premiering – is in Manhattan.
The glamorous settings in which he is now showing Qarantina – a screening at the Museum of Modern Art, for example, and in the private homes of American directors and stars – could not be further removed from the violence-riddled context of his daily life.
In Baghdad, Rasheed has gained fame – and notoriety – by seeking to inspire a new generation of Iraqi filmmakers and other young artists.
Qarantina is one of only four feature films completed in Iraq in the past 12 years.
A member of a collective called Najeen (Survivors), Rasheed is part of a vanguard of younger artists, writers, and filmmakers whose work attests to their commitment to art in the midst of crisis.
It is startling to see him walk into a New York living room: his demeanor is quiet and dignified.
“Of seven close friends I had growing up,” he tells me, “five are dead.”
One was recently murdered by a gunshot to the head while he was standing in his kitchen.
Some days, he says, “you wake up and the radio or TV reports five car bombings,” leading to a kind of claustrophobia – part of the subject matter of his film.
I noted that he might be experiencing post-traumatic stress from the loss of his friend.
Rasheed is just turning 40, and his life reflects his country’s dramas: part of what has been called a “lost generation” of Iraqi artists and intellectuals, he and his friends were isolated for years by sanctions.
But he also describes the Saddam years as an era in which, while there was no freedom, intellectuals had room to maneuver, as long as they “knew what to leave alone.”
He lived through the US-led invasion during a formative time in his creative life – he was writing for television and engaged in film criticism and commentary while trying to survive bombardment, looting, and chaos.
When the US military sought to showcase the fact that a filmmaker was at work in occupied Iraq, Rasheed was swept to a formal dinner in one of Saddam's former palaces in the Green Zone, attended by senior US officials and military contractors – an invitation that one would not want to receive, and would not be able to turn down.
Now Rasheed reflects on his country’s turn toward religious extremism: he describes a pre-invasion Iraq in which women were professionals and fairly emancipated, whereas now women wear headscarves under pressure, “for a peaceful life.”
His friend, a young Iraqi actress named Zahra Zubaidi, had to flee the Middle East after having played a rape victim in the Brian de Palma film Redacted; she has since emigrated to New York.
Constant intimidation by religious extremists and political factions is the intellectual’s fate in Iraq today.
And yet Rasheed refuses to be discreet: “Everything I believe, I believe in it,” he says.
Rasheed is in New York mainly because it is the location of his next film, which “deals with the influence of the US contractors after the invasion of Iraq, not only on the lives of Iraqis, but also on the life of the US.”
As for Iraq today, Rasheed says, “I do not think that Americans are indifferent to what happened and what is happening, but the daily details of cruelty do not give them either the time or the energy to think about larger issues.”
Indeed, Rasheed notes that at every US screening of his film, audiences need to apologize before they begin to relate to Rasheed as a filmmaker rather than as a representative of his country.
Iraq, ravaged by war and now shaken daily by violence, is known as the most intellectually inclined of the Arab countries.
As Iraqi and other Muslim intellectuals in the region often repeat: “Books are written in Egypt, printed in Lebanon, and read in Iraq.”
Here is hoping that Raheed and his colleagues continue to build up an Iraqi culture that is vibrant and free; and here is hoping that the relationship of US and international audiences to Rasheed goes from one of expiation to one of engagement with his work.
His embrace of the right to his truth, which is the artist’s task, is nonetheless remarkable, given that he is working in an environment in which part of the creative process involves trying to stay alive.
Mental health services around the world are largely based on the assumption that being upset or disoriented is a sort of condition like medical illnesses.
Here in Australasia, we imported this perspective from overseas, actively suppressing more holistic Maori and Aboriginal understandings about human distress.
We did so despite numerous studies that show that recovery rates from “mental illness” in “underdeveloped” countries are far superior to those in “advanced” societies.
Nowadays, more and more problems are being redefined as “disorders” or “illnesses,” supposedly caused by genetic predispositions and biochemical imbalances.
Our Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders has 886 pages of such illnesses.
Unusual or undesirable behaviors are called “symptoms” and the labels are “diagnoses.”
Ignoring other people’s feelings (once called being naughty) means that the child is suffering from “conduct disorder.”
If this includes getting angry at grownups, he or she (usually he) has “oppositional defiant disorder.”
A “diagnosis” frequently in the news is “attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder.”
The “symptoms” include fidgeting, losing things, talking excessively, and difficulty playing quietly or taking turns.
Perhaps it sometimes conceals the causes, while locating the problem entirely within the child, who is often stigmatized as a result.
Indeed, making lists of behaviors, applying medical-sounding labels to people who manifest them, and then using the presence of those behaviors to prove that a person has the illness in question is scientifically meaningless.
How did this simplistic, certainly unscientific, and frequently damaging approach gain such dominance?
First, it is tempting to avoid facing the painful events in our lives that might be the cause of our difficulties.
They don’t need to spend money on prevention programs to address the psycho-social problems –overwhelming stress, poverty, discrimination, child neglect and abuse, and loneliness, to name but a few – that research has repeatedly demonstrated play a large role in undermining mental health.
Third, exciting developments in technologies for studying our brains and genes have created the hope that we are about to discover the biological causes of, and solutions to, human misery and confusion.
The pharmaceutical industry, fueled by our desire for quick fixes, has effectively deployed its considerable power to promulgate the notion of “disorders” and “illnesses” in all domains of our lives.
Naturally, they encourage us to diagnose eating, sleeping, or feeling too much (or too little) as illnesses requiring a chemical cure.
Having listened for 20 years to people unfortunate enough to be labeled “schizophrenic,” considered to be the most extreme form of “mental illness,” and having subsequently researched the causes of hallucinations and delusions for ten years, I believe that the public understands madness better than we experts.
Surveys of public opinion all over the world find that most people believe that emotional problems, including those deemed severe, such as hearing voices, are primarily caused by bad things happening to us rather than by faulty brains or genes.
The public also favors psycho-social approaches, such as talking to someone and getting advice, or help finding friends or a job, rather than drugs, electro-shocks, or admission to psychiatric hospital.
Some experts, however, dismiss these views as “mental health illiteracy.”
They continue to insist that mental illness is an illness like any other, despite many studies showing that the more we adopt this medical model, the more prejudiced and frightened we become.
Mental health services should offer something more than having our feelings chemically suppressed, or having our children’s difficulties sitting still controlled by amphetamines (which, apart from teaching children that problems are best solved with drugs, stunt growth by an average of one centimeter per year).
A wide range of effective treatments are available that don’t cause weight gain, sexual dysfunction, diabetes, memory loss, or addiction.
Funders and policymakers who keep up with the relevant research are slowly beginning to introduce more talking therapies (such as cognitive therapy and trauma-focused counseling), more alternatives to hospitalization, more culturally appropriate services, more family-focused therapy and, most importantly, more genuine consultation with service users about what actually works.
If these new treatments aren’t used more frequently, this isn’t because they don’t work.
The main obstacle is that they won’t increase the profits of drug companies, on which, in the absence of adequate government funding, our professional organizations, conferences, journals, research, and teaching institutions have become so dependent.
VIENNA – Nuclear power has become safer since the devastating accident one year ago at Fukushima, Japan.
It will become safer still in the coming years, provided that governments, plant operators, and regulators do not drop their guard.
The accident at Fukushima resulted from an earthquake and tsunami of unprecedented severity.
But, as the Japanese authorities have acknowledged, human and organizational failings played an important part, too.
For example, Japan’s nuclear regulatory authority was not sufficiently independent, and oversight of the plant operator, TEPCO, was weak.
At the Fukushima site, the backup power supply, essential for maintaining vital safety functions such as cooling the reactors and spent fuel rods, was not properly protected.
There was a lack of integrated emergency-response capability at the site and nationally.
Fukushima was a wake-up call for all countries that use nuclear power.
It prompted serious soul-searching and recognition that safety can never be taken for granted anywhere.
Indeed, governments, regulators, and plant operators around the world have begun learning the right lessons.
As a result, the likelihood of another disaster on the scale of Fukushima has been reduced.
Perhaps most importantly, the worst-case assumptions for safety planning have been radically revised.
At Fukushima, the reactors withstood a magnitude 9.0 earthquake – far more powerful than they were designed to tolerate.
But the plant was not designed to withstand the 14-meter-high tsunami waves that swept over its protective sea wall less than an hour later.
In the aftermath of Fukushima, defenses against multiple severe natural disasters, including earthquakes and tsunamis, are being strengthened at nuclear facilities all over the world.
Measures are being taken to improve preparedness for prolonged power outages, protect backup power sources, and ensure the availability of water for cooling even under severe accident conditions.
Countries are opening their plants to more –amp#160;and more thorough – international safety reviews.
Despite the accident, global use of nuclear power looks set to grow steadily in the next 20 years, although at a slower rate than previously forecast.
The reasons for this have not changed: rising demand for energy, alongside concerns about climate change, volatile fossil-fuel prices, and the security of energy supplies.
It will be difficult for the world to achieve the twin goals of ensuring sustainable energy supplies and curbing greenhouse gases unless nuclear power remains an important part of the global energy mix.
The International Atomic Energy Agency expects at least 90 additional nuclear-power reactors to join the 437 now in operation globally by 2030.
Although some countries abandoned or scaled back their nuclear energy plans after Fukushima, major users of nuclear power, such as China, India, and Russia, are going forward with ambitious expansion plans.
Many other countries, mainly in the developing world, are considering introducing nuclear power.
Nuclear safety is of the utmost importance to both established users and newcomers.
It matters to countries that have decided to phase out nuclear power, because their plants will continue to operate for decades and will need to be decommissioned, with nuclear waste stored safely.
And it matters to countries that are firmly opposed to nuclear power, as many of them have neighbors with nuclear-power plants.
Countries planning new nuclear-power programs must recognize that achieving their goals is a challenging, long-term undertaking.
They need to invest considerable time and money in training scientists and engineers, establishing genuinely independent, well-funded regulators, and putting in place the necessary technical infrastructure.
Nonetheless, contrary to popular perception, nuclear power has a good overall safety record.
New reactors being built today incorporate significantly enhanced safety features, both active and passive, compared to the Fukushima generation of reactors.
But, in order to regain and maintain public confidence, governments, regulators, and operators must be transparent about the benefits and risks of nuclear power – and honest when things go wrong.
The fact that an accident such as Fukushima was possible in Japan, one of the world’s most advanced industrial countries, is a reminder that, when it comes to nuclear safety, nothing can be taken for granted.
We must not slip back into a “business as usual” approach as Fukushima recedes from memory.
MUNICH – Observers might be forgiven for thinking that so-called clean technology's moment in the sun has passed.
Over the last two years, many clean-tech equity indexes have performed poorly.
In Europe, solar power took a hit after the European Commission decided to phase out subsidies for renewable energy by 2017.
The installation of solar panels fell by nearly 60% in Germany in 2013, and by 70% in Italy.
Meanwhile, in the United Kingdom, less than 30% of early-stage venture-capital-funded clean-tech deals were financed.
The convulsions in the clean-tech sector are simply symptoms of a cycle that characterizes emerging technologies: excitement, inflated expectations, and consolidation – ultimately followed by stability and the resumption of growth.
Indeed, underlying recent developments are signs of a much more significant transformation: clean tech is becoming commercially viable.
Confidence in the clean-tech sector's future is rooted in the need for sustainable solutions for a planet that is supporting an ever-wealthier population.
Over the next 20 years, the number of middle-class consumers is expected to rise to some three billion, from 1.8 billion today.
This surge in demand will occur at a time when finding, developing, and extracting new sources of energy and resources will be increasingly challenging and expensive.
Over the last 12 years, for example, the average real construction cost of an oil well has doubled, and in recent years new mining discoveries have been few, despite the industry's best (and often expensive) efforts.
But clean-energy costs are trending in the opposite direction, ripening these solutions at a time when need – particularly in some of the world's largest developing cities – is becoming acute.
One pivotal question for the future of clean tech has been whether it needs regulatory support to thrive.
But, even as Germany and Italy lost their first- and second-place rankings in terms of new solar-power installations, China and Japan took their place.
Globally, the solar-power industry has grown at an average annual rate of 57% since 2006.
Regulatory support has been effective in creating demand and allowing sources of renewable supply to reach scale.
One lesson from the German experience is that sudden changes in regulation can create peaks and valleys in demand that are not helpful to an industry that is still emerging.
The biggest risk in many markets is not that subsidies and other supports will be withdrawn, but that the regulatory structure will not adapt as the sector develops.
And, indeed, solar power increasingly appears to be able to survive without regulatory help.
A thriving global marketplace goes a long way toward leveling the playing field across all resource options.
During the last five years, dozens of solar manufacturing companies have failed, only to be replaced by stronger, more innovative, and more efficient players.
More than one-quarter of cumulative global solar photovoltaic capacity was installed just in the past year.
The International Energy Agency, which has been conservative regarding solar energy's prospects, now expects it to be the world's largest power source by 2050.
Nonetheless, concerns about the future of clean tech have made new projects more difficult to finance.
But innovative new schemes, such as clean-tech bonds and third-party financing, are changing the picture.
Third-party ownership, in which a company installs and maintains solar panels, in exchange for either a set monthly rate or a fixed price per unit of power, has driven up adoption rates in California, financing more than two-thirds of new installations in 2012 and 2013.
Similarly, new partnerships with large industry incumbents – such as the tie-up between Daimler and Tesla and the controlling stake that Total took in SunPower – are reducing the cost of finance for smaller firms.
An entire new industry has been created around the use of information technology to reduce energy consumption.
Some companies, such as C3 Energy, offer electric utilities software that can analyze their electrical networks to improve grid operations and asset utilization, thereby increasing profits.
Smart-grid hardware has been deployed widely in the past decade, and as companies figure out how to use big data and analytic tools, it will become much more important.
Google's acquisition of Nest Labs for $3.2 billion is a good example of the value that companies are placing on this kind of data.
All of this adds up to an industry that Bloomberg calculates reached $310 billion in investment last year.
This is not a “niche" segment, but an asset-intensive industry on its way to commoditization.
Clean tech is maturing and adopting proven management practices in operations, marketing, sales, and distribution.
Increasingly, the industry is implementing approaches that have ensured success in other sectors, such as reducing procurement costs and deploying lean principles in manufacturing.
As clean-tech businesses continue to scale up, there will be additional opportunities to improve.
The shakeout in the clean-tech industry has been tough; but it has also been typical of emerging technologies, and, by weeding out the weaker players, it has made the sector more robust.
There is little room for doubt that the clean-tech industry can expect plenty of sunny days ahead.
PRINCETON – As European leaders struggle after another failed summit, they should think hard about what their continent – and the world – might look like if they continue to produce unsatisfactory solutions to Europe’s financial and economic problems.
What would follow the disintegration of the eurozone and – almost certainly with it – that of the European Union?
The best place to consider that question would not be Brussels, but Tiraspol, the capital of the entity that calls itself the Pridnestrovian Moldavian Republic, or Trans-Dniestr.
This territorial sliver with a population of a half-million emerged in the early 1990’s, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union (population almost 300 million), when it broke away from the Republic of Moldova (population four million), which had separated in the 1940’s from Ukraine (population 50 million).
Trans-Dniestr has its own government and parliament, army, constitution, flag, and a rousing Soviet-style national anthem; of course, its nationhood would be incomplete without its own currency.
This political entity is a precise counterpart in the political world to a well-known physical phenomenon of splintering or fissuring.
When stressed, a big surface bifurcates in big chunks, but then the disintegration continues into smaller and smaller fragments.
Of the six larger EU states, only France has a really well-defined centralized political system.
Poland’s centralism comes close, but strong regional differences persist – a legacy of the three large and quite different imperial systems that encompassed today’s Poland in the nineteenth century.
Italy and Germany were nineteenth-century amalgamations of a colorful variety of small and medium-size political units.
The United Kingdom looks older and more stable, but Scotland today is controlled by a political party that wants to repeal the 1707 Act of Union, with the future to be determined by a Scottish referendum in 2014.
Spain after the Franco dictatorship stabilized itself by granting autonomy to its regions, which in many ways now behave like independent units.
In these fragmented political areas, the logic of integration in the past depended on areas that were dissatisfied with political outcomes appealing to new allies in larger units.
Franconians in southern Germany disliked the fact that the Napoleonic Wars subjected them to Bavarian rule; they saw German nationalism as a way to use Prussia and Berlin as a counterweight to Munich’s hegemony.
But, once Germany was united, Bavarians did not like the outcome, and then thought of a united Europe as a counterweight to the German state.
Indeed, Bavaria became adept at using European Community resources to bolster its own political system.
Integration had its own historical momentum; if and when it goes into reverse, that process will have a counter-momentum.
The argument against European structures depends on hostility to a transfer union that might lead to some redistribution of resources.
Why should our money be taken away and given to people in a very different area?
Germans thinking about the likelihood of transfers to southern Europe doubtless recall their country’s reunification after the collapse of communist East Germany in 1989-1990.
That was not enough to halt the hollowing out of the eastern Länder, as many of the ablest and most entrepreneurial people left – an experience that put enormous strain on national solidarity.
Problems of transfers in a large political unit are at the heart of federalism.
The United States’ early history was dominated by a passionate debate about the issue of solidarity.
In 1790, when Alexander Hamilton argued that the new federal government should assume the states’ debts from the War of Independence, he encountered fierce hostility.
The only way to sustain such a new political order, James Madison argued in The Federalist Papers, was to ensure that federal powers were few and limited.
It is now mired in an existential crisis more profound than at any point since 1945.
And, while muddling through is a characteristic response of complex political systems, it is deeply destructive.
If Europe’s political center is widely perceived to be arbitrary and overweening, its authority will be rejected and resisted.
While adopting a new treaty may look like an unwieldy process, ill-suited to managing a fast-moving modern financial crisis, it is the only way to generate legitimacy for the institutions that are needed to address that crisis – in particular to provide reassurance that transfers will not be indefinite and unlimited.
If European integration shifts into reverse, the outcome will not be a series of happy and prosperous nation-states, living in a sort of replica of the 1950’s or 1960’s.
Southern Germans would wonder whether they were not transferring too much to the north’s old industrial rustbelt; northern Italians who support the anti-EU Lega Nord in the self-styled unit of “Padania” would want to escape from the rule of Rome and the south.
Setting the clock back would thus not simply return Europe to the mid-twentieth century.
The small states of the mid-nineteenth century, with no fiscal transfers out of a relatively limited area, might be recreated.
But the dynamic might go further: the German territories had around 350 independent political entities in the mid-eighteenth century, and more than 3,000 before the middle of the seventeenth century.
BERLIN – German Chancellor Angela Merkel should be happy nowadays: her party’s approval ratings aren’t bad, and her own are very good.
She no longer has serious rivals within the center-right Christian Democratic Union (CDU), while the left opposition is fragmented into four parties.
Her response to the European crisis has prevailed – or at least that is the impression that she conveys, and that most Germans believe.
Two issues could complicate Merkel’s re-election bid in the autumn of 2013.
Domestically, her coalition partner, the liberal Free Democrats (FDP), is disintegrating.
Even if the FDP survives the next election (which is by no means certain), the current coalition is unlikely to retain its parliamentary majority, leaving Merkel increasingly dependent on the Social Democrats (SPD).
While this need not matter to her too much as long as she retains the chancellorship, in Sigmar Gabriel, the SPD’s leader, she faces – for the first time – an opponent whom she would underestimate at her peril.
If she is unlucky, the crisis will come to a head at the start of the German election year, and all previous calculations could be moot, because, despite Germans’ frustration with Europe, the electorate would punish severely those who allowed Europe to fail.
The European Union’s economy is sliding into a severe and, in all likelihood, long-lasting recession, largely self-inflicted.
While Germany is still trying to banish the specter of hyperinflation with strict eurozone austerity measures, the EU crisis countries are facing a real threat of deflation, with potentially disastrous consequences.
It is only a question of time – no longer very much time – before economic destabilization gives rise to political instability.
Hungary, where democratic backsliding appears to be taking hold, provides a foretaste of a Europe in which the eurozone crisis and deflation persist.
The mood in the Mediterranean EU members, as well as in Ireland, is heating up, owing not only to the tightening squeeze of austerity, but also – and perhaps more importantly – to the absence of policies that offer people hope for a better future.
The explosive nature of current trends, which point to eventual re-nationalization of sovereignty from the bottom up, is greatly underestimated in Berlin.
With Mario Monti’s premiership, Italy has mobilized its best people, and neither Italy nor Europe will get a better government for the foreseeable future.
If Monti’s administration is toppled – either in parliament or in the streets – the EU’s fourth-largest economy could come crashing down.
Developments in France (the second-largest eurozone economy) should also not be underestimated in this presidential election year.
If a majority of the French come to believe that a course of action is being imposed on them from outside – and by Germany, no less! – they will respond with traditional Gallic stubbornness.
What is at stake is less the election’s outcome than the margin between President Nicolas Sarkozy and the far-right National Front leader, Marine Le Pen – and whether she overtakes him to qualify for the second-round run-off against the Socialist candidate.
While she would be unlikely to win the presidency, she could reshape and realign the French right.
For that reason, a Sarkozy debacle would drastically reduce his Socialist successor’s room for maneuver on European policy, fundamentally altering France’s position in Europe.
But, while the French election’s outcome will hinge to a crucial extent on European crisis politics, Germany’s government acts as if this were none of its concern.
Instead, the main – almost exclusive – topic in Berlin is the upcoming election.
And the central question is not, “What needs to be done now in the interest of Europe?”
Rather, it is, “How much can people in Germany be expected to accept – in particular, how much honesty?”
No one will act in a way that jeopardizes their electoral prospects, at least while there are still alternatives.
So it is conceivable that Germany is not at all interested in a serious effort to resolve Europe’s crisis, because that would mean taking big risks and investing a lot of money.
The CDU-FDP coalition prefers to sugarcoat the situation by convincing themselves of an Anglo-Saxon conspiracy, abetted by those in the European crisis countries unwilling to perform and reform and whose only purpose is to make the Germans pay.
So far, Merkel’s coalition is like someone driving against traffic, dead certain that everyone else is going the wrong way.
Distrust and national egoism are spreading rapidly, devouring European solidarity and common purpose.
Institutionally, Europe has been on the right track since the last summit, but it threatens to disintegrate from the bottom up.
To save the euro – which is essential, because the European project’s fate depends on the success of monetary union – Europe needs action now: in addition to indispensable austerity measures and structural reforms, there is no way to succeed without a viable economic program that will assure growth.
If Merkel’s government believes that paying lip service to growth is enough, it is playing with fire: a euro collapse in which not only Germans would be badly burned.
LONDON – As the third anniversary of the start of Syria’s civil war approaches, there is a race against time to deliver a groundbreaking education project to the conflict’s hardest-hit victims – hundreds of thousands of child refugees.
More than one million of them have fled Syria and are languishing in camps in neighboring countries, particularly Lebanon, Jordan, and Turkey.
These children are now suffering a third winter away from their homes, schools, and friends.
Many are separated from their families, and thousands more join the ranks of displaced persons every day in what is becoming the largest humanitarian catastrophe of our time.
But a pathbreaking initiative in Lebanon, involving teachers, aid agencies, and education charities has opened a small window of hope.
Amid the chaos of camps, makeshift huts, and destitution, the fight for an important new principle of international aid has begun: even in times of conflict, children must have access to education.
A century and a half ago, the Red Cross established the norm that health care could – and should – be provided even in conflict zones.
This principle was carried forward by groups like Médicins sans Frontières, whose doctors have risked their lives for the last four decades to deliver medical care to the world’s most dangerous places.
Now Lebanon is the site of a pilot program to advance the idea that providing education for refugee children is equally feasible – and no less important.
Across 1,500 communities in this troubled, divided country, where Syrian refugee children now make up 20% of the school-age population, the aim is to establish children’s right to education as a humanitarian priority.
And every month that a child is out of school makes it less likely that they will ever return.
Three years ago, most Syrian children were at school, and the country had near universal primary education.
So, in Syria and the surrounding region, there is already a lost generation in the making: children who are now eight and nine and who have never been to school, children condemned to work as child laborers, and hundreds of girls forced into early marriages.
There are gruesome tales of young people who have been forced to sell their kidneys and other organs simply to survive.
But, in conflicts like these, the one thing that children need, beyond the material basics, is hope.
And it is education that provides children with hope that there is light at the end of the tunnel – hope that they can plan for the future and prepare for jobs and adulthood.
The pilot project in Lebanon, designed by Kevin Watkins of the United Kingdom’s Overseas Development Institute and led by the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) and the UN High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), creates the opportunity to establish a right to education irrespective of borders.
Indeed, it is designed to cater to all 435,000 Syrian child refugees now in the country.
Thanks to a historic agreement with the Lebanese government, places for hundreds of thousands of children can be created within weeks by putting 1,500 of Lebanon’s schools on a double-shift system.
The scheme is already being piloted in a small village called Akroum in the north of the country.
Lebanese children are taught during the first shift, and Syrian children in the second.
Using the same school for both sets of pupils means that education can be delivered at a cost of only £400 ($670) per child per year.
To secure places for all refugee children, we are seeking $195 million dollars a year for UNICEF and UNHCR, with the plan to be implemented on the ground by NGOs and the Lebanese authorities.
The aim is to secure all funding during March, as the world marks the third anniversary of this tragic exodus from Syria.
We have already assembled a coalition of ten donor countries to take the lead, but we need ten more donors to fund the project fully.
We are appealing to donors not just to create thousands of school places for desperately needy children, but also to establish a precedent for the 20 million other children driven by violent conflict into displaced-persons camps and shantytowns.
There cannot be universal educational opportunity for the worlds’ children without an agreement that we will cater to children in conflict zones.
Thousands of children in South Sudan still await their first chance to go to school, and schools have yet to be provided for a million more children in the war-torn Central African Republic.
These children’s chances now depend on showing that we can make progress in Lebanon.
The UN Millennium Development Goals, adopted in 2000, expire in December 2015, which means that time is running to meet the deadline for achieving the target of universal primary education.
That goal will remain unattainable unless and until we establish the long-overdue principle that a child’s right to education knows no boundaries.
BEIJING – The world’s two largest economies – China and the United States – are engaged in a full-blown trade war, and what US President Donald Trump hoped would be a blitzkrieg has turned out more like trench combat.
Many fear that this is only the beginning of a long conflict that could include weapons – and casualties – far outside the realm of trade.
Since China joined the World Trade Organization in 2001, the US has taken issue with China’s large current-account surplus and the undervalued renminbi.
But over the last ten years, that surplus has pretty much disappeared, and the renminbi has largely been appreciating.
Now, the US has shifted its attention to China’s inadequate protection of intellectual-property rights and its policy of appropriating foreign technology in exchange for market access.
Yet, in China’s view, what the US is really reacting to is not only the specifics of its trade policy, but also its overall development model and its aspirations to become a major global power – aspirations that are not out of reach.
In fact, the Chinese believe, Trump’s trade war effectively proves that China has become a real and present threat to American hegemony.
Whereas in the past, only a few conservatives warned of US attempts to “contain” China, virtually everyone in China now buys into this narrative, including a growing number of young people.
Having grown up amid prosperity and confidence, exposed to Western lifestyles and educations, China’s millennial generation – born in the 1980s and 1990s – were supposed to usher in an era of even greater openness and freedom.
Yet these young people – who have previously reported much warmer feelings toward Western countries and Japan than their parents and grandparents – are having their faith in Western ideas tested by Trump’s actions.
The real danger is that rising nationalism could embolden a contingent of the Party, known in China as the New Left, that denounces capitalism and its Western proponents, and calls for a return to the Maoist socialist order of 40 years ago.
On the positive side, it is likely to produce the political cohesion needed to implement structural reforms that shift the economy away from trade and manufacturing and toward domestic consumption.
As different interest groups and factions unite against a common foe, President Xi Jinping will gain even more political capital, facilitating the shift from export-led economic growth to a trade-neutral model.
This is not to say that China is not continuing to pursue its plans to open up further.
Even as China raises tariffs on US imports, it is lowering tariffs for other countries, in order to fulfill its promise to increase overall imports and bolster domestic consumption.
And its impending liberalization of its financial-services sector will amount to its biggest step toward openness since its accession to the WTO.
Areas that will become open to foreign participation include banking, securities, insurance, payments, and ratings services.
Restrictions on foreign investors’ equity holdings or investments in services are being sequentially eliminated.
Reflecting Xi’s belief that “sooner is better than later, and faster is better than slower,” at least seven of the 11 measures the central bank announced in April have already been completed.
Even as China continues its economic opening, however, it is looking increasingly inward, at its citizens to serve as consumers and at its businesses to adopt and advance new technologies.
Many companies have already redoubled their efforts to increase their value-added and innovation capacity.
Whether Trump’s trade war is about containing China or just about punishing it for its trade practices, the unintended consequence is that China is now fortifying itself for a new era of political and economic challenges.
Yes, the country will find it more difficult to pursue the “Belt and Road Initiative,” for example, or to export its excess capacity.
But in the longer term, reducing its reliance on foreign trade and imported technologies will leave China stronger, more resilient, and possibly less willing to acquiesce to US-designed rules.
Sometimes the “loser” of a trade war ends up better off than the “winner.”
In the 1980s, when President Ronald Reagan imposed restrictions on the number of cars Japan could export to the US, Japan suffered.
But, over time, it developed its auto industry so that it could export more expensive cars.
Trump thinks that attacking China through trade will help to “Make America Great Again.”
NEW DELHI – One major casualty of Donald Trump’s victory in the bruising US presidential election is, without a doubt, America’s soft power around the world.
It is a development that will be difficult – perhaps even impossible – to reverse, especially for Trump.
Traditionally, countries’ global political power was assessed according to military might: the one with the largest army had the most power.
In its first few years in Iraq, the US discovered the wisdom of Talleyrand’s adage that the one thing you cannot do with a bayonet is sit on it.
The term was coined by Harvard’s Joseph S. Nye in 1990 to account for the influence a country – and, in particular, the US – wields, beyond its military (or “hard”) power.
As Nye put it, a country’s power rests on its “ability to alter the behavior of others” to get what it wants, whether through coercion (sticks), payments (carrots), or attraction (soft power).
“If you are able to attract others,” he pointed out, “you can economize on the sticks and carrots.”
Nye argues that a country’s soft power arises from “its culture (in places where it is attractive to others), its political values (when it lives up to them at home and abroad), and its foreign policies (when they are seen as legitimate and having moral authority.)”
But I believe that it also emerges from the world’s perceptions of what a country is about: the associations and attitudes conjured by the mention of a country’s name.
The US has been the world’s largest economy and oldest democracy, a haven for immigrants, and the land of the American Dream – the promise that anyone can be anything if they work hard enough.
It is also the home of Boeing and Intel, Google and Apple, Microsoft and MTV, Hollywood and Disneyland, McDonald’s and Starbucks – in short, some of the most recognizable and influential brands and industries in the world.
The attractiveness of these assets, and of the American lifestyle that they represent, is that they enable the US to persuade, rather than compel, others to adopt its agenda.
In this sense, soft power acts as both an alternative and a complement to hard power.
But there are limits to a country’s soft power – even America’s.
In the wake of the US terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, there was an outpouring of goodwill for the US.
Then the country launched its War on Terror, in which it relied heavily on hard power.
The instruments of that power – the Iraq invasion, indefinite detention of “enemy combatants” and other suspects at Guantánamo Bay prison, the Abu Ghraib scandal, revelations of CIA “black sites,” the killing of Iraqi civilians by private US security contractors – were not received well by the global public.
America’s soft-power assets were inadequate to compensate for the deficiencies of its hard-power approach.
Fans of American culture were not prepared to overlook the excesses of Guantánamo.
Using Microsoft Windows does not predispose you to accept torture by the country that produces it.
America’s soft power declined sharply, demonstrating that how a country exercises its hard power affects how much soft power it can evoke.
America’s domestic narrative soon overcame its foreign-policy setbacks, thanks partly to today’s unprecedented connectivity.
In a world of instant mass communications, countries are judged by a global public fed on a diet of relentless online news, smartphone videos, and Twitter gossip.
In such an information age, Nye wrote, three types of countries are likely to gain soft power: “those whose dominant cultures and ideals are closer to prevailing global norms (which now emphasize liberalism, pluralism, autonomy); those with the most access to multiple channels of communication and thus more influence over how issues are framed; and those whose credibility is enhanced by their domestic and international performance.”
Indeed, America’s culture and ideals set the bar for others, and its international credibility rested on its domestic arrangements.
Overcoming the legacy of centuries of slavery and racism to elect a black president in 2008 and again in 2012 seemed to embody the country’s capacity to reinvent and renew itself.
It has exposed and encouraged tendencies the world never used to associate with the US: xenophobia, misogyny, pessimism, and selfishness.
A system that promised a level playing field on which anyone could fulfill their aspirations is being denounced by its own political leaders as stacked against ordinary citizens.
A country that confidently counsels others on democratic practice has elected a president who suggested that, if he lost, he might not recognize the result.
Nye has argued that, in an information age, soft power often accrues to the country with the better story.
It has a free press and an open society; it welcomes migrants and refugees; it has a thirst for new ideas and a knack for innovation.
All of this has given the US an extraordinary ability to tell stories that are more persuasive and attractive than those of its rivals.
But the story of America told in this election has deeply diminished the soft power the US evokes.
And the demons released from Pandora’s box in 2016 – echoing in widespread reports of racist taunts by Trump supporters of non-whites in America – will continue to roam free in the country’s self-perception, and taint everyone else’s perception, too.
In our eyes, America will never be the same – and Trump’s term hasn’t even begun.
LAGUNA BEACH – The retreat of the advanced economies from the global economy – and, in the case of the United Kingdom, from regional trading arrangements – has received a lot of attention lately.
At a time when the global economy’s underlying structures are under strain, this could have far-reaching consequences.
Whether by choice or necessity, the vast majority of the world’s economies are part of a multilateral system that gives their counterparts in the advanced world – especially the United States and Europe – enormous privileges.
First, because they issue the world’s main reserve currencies, the advanced economies get to exchange bits of paper that they printed for goods and services produced by others.
Second, for most global investors, these economies’ bonds are a quasi-automatic component of portfolio allocations, so their governments’ budget deficits are financed in part by other countries’ savings.
They command either veto power or a blocking minority in the Bretton Woods institutions (the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank), which gives them a disproportionate influence on the rules and practices that govern the international economic and monetary system.
And, given their historical dominance of these organizations, their nationals are de facto assured the top positions.
These privileges don’t come for free – at least they shouldn’t.
In exchange, the advanced economies are supposed to fulfill certain responsibilities that help ensure the system’s functioning and stability.
But recent developments have cast doubts on whether the advanced economies are able to hold up their end of this bargain.
The result of excessive risk-taking and lax regulation in the advanced economies, the financial system’s near-meltdown disrupted global trade, threw millions into unemployment, and almost tipped the world into a multi-year depression.
For example, political obstacles to comprehensive economic policymaking in many advanced economies have undermined the implementation of structural reforms and responsive fiscal policies in recent years, holding back business investment, undermining productivity growth, worsening inequality, and threatening future potential growth.
Such economic lapses have contributed to the emergence of anti-establishment political movements that are looking to change – or are already changing – long-established cross-border trade relations, including those within the European Union and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Meanwhile, a prolonged and excessive reliance on monetary policy, including direct central-bank involvement in market activities, has distorted asset prices and contributed to resource misallocation.
And the advanced economies – particularly Europe – have shown little appetite for reforming outdated elements of governance and representation at the international financial institutions, despite major changes in the global economy.
The result of all this is a multilateral system that is less effective, less collaborative, less trusted, and more vulnerable to ad hoc tinkering.
Against this background, it should not be surprising that globalization and regionalization no longer command the degree of support they once did – or that some rising political movements on both sides of the Atlantic are condemning both concepts to win more support for their own causes.
It is not yet clear whether this is a temporary and reversible phenomenon or the beginning of a protracted challenge to the functioning of the global economy.
For a long time, small, well-managed, and open economies were the leading beneficiaries of the Bretton Woods system and, more generally, of multilateralism.
Their size not only made them crave access to outside markets; it also made other market actors more willing to integrate them into regional pacts, owing to their limited displacement potential.
Membership in effective international institutions brought these countries into consequential global policy discussions, while their own capabilities allowed them to exploit opportunities in cross-border production and consumption chains.
But, at a time of surging nationalism, these small and open economies, however well managed, are likely to suffer.
Their trading relationships are less stable; the trade pacts on which they depend are vulnerable; and their participation in global policy discussions is less assured.
The second relationship is that between the Bretton Woods institutions and parallel institutional arrangements.
For example, while they pale in significance to, say, the World Bank, China-led institutions have proved appealing to a growing number of countries; most US allies have joined the Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank, despite American opposition.
Similarly, bilateral payment agreements – which, not long ago, most countries would have opposed via the IMF, owing to their inconsistency with multilateralism – are proliferating.
The concern is that these alternative approaches could undermine, rather than reinforce, a predictable and beneficial rules-based system of cross-border interactions.
The Bretton Woods organizations, instituted after World War II to maintain stability, risk losing their influence, and the countries with the clout to bolster them seem unwilling at this stage to press ahead boldly with the needed reforms.
If these tendencies continue, developing countries will probably suffer the most; but they won’t be alone.
In the short term, the world economy would face slower economic growth and the risk of greater financial instability.
In the longer term, it would confront the threat of systemic fragmentation and proliferating trade wars.
CAMBRIDGE – The prices of hydrocarbons, minerals, and agricultural commodities have been on a veritable roller coaster.
While commodity prices are always more variable than those for manufactured goods and services, commodity markets over the last five years have seen extraordinary, almost unprecedented, volatility.
Countries that specialize in the export of oil, copper, iron ore, wheat, coffee, or other commodities have been booming, but they are highly vulnerable.
Dollar commodity prices could plunge at any time, as a result of a new recession, an increase in real interest rates in the United States, fluctuations in climate, or random sector-specific factors.
Countries that have outstanding debt in dollars or other foreign currencies are especially vulnerable.
If their export revenues were to plunge relative to their debt-service obligations, the result could be crises reminiscent of Latin America’s in 1982 or the Asian and Russian currency crises of 1997-1998.
Many developing countries have made progress since the 1990’s in shifting from dollar-denominated debt toward foreign direct investment and other types of capital inflows, or in paying down their liabilities altogether.
But some commodity exporters still seek ways to borrow that won’t expose them to excessive risk.
Exporters of any particular commodity should issue debt that is denominated in terms of the price of that commodity, rather than in dollars or any other currency.
Sierra Leone would issue iron-ore bonds; and Mongolia would issue copper bonds.
Investors would be able to buy Guatemala’s coffee bonds, Côte d’Ivoire’s cocoa bonds, Liberia’s rubber bonds, Mali’s cotton bonds, and Ghana’s gold bonds.
The advantage of such bonds is that in the event of a decline in the world price of the underlying commodity, the debt-to-export ratio need not rise.
The cost of debt service adjusts automatically, without the severe disruption that results from loss of confidence, crisis, debt restructuring, and so forth.
When one asks finance ministers in commodity-exporting debtor countries, they frequently reply that they fear insufficient demand for commodity bonds.
That is a surprising proposition, given that commodity bonds have an obvious latent market, rooted in real economic fundamentals.
After all, steel companies have an inherent need to hedge against fluctuations in the price of iron ore, just as airlines and utilities have an inherent need to hedge against fluctuations in the price of oil.
Surely there is at least as much natural demand for commodity bonds as there is for credit-default swaps and some of the bizarrely complicated derivatives that are currently traded!
It takes liquidity to make a market successful, and it can be difficult to get a new one started until it achieves a certain critical mass.
The problem may be that there are not many investors who want to take a long position on oil and Nigerian credit risk simultaneously.
A multilateral agency such as the World Bank could play a critical role in launching a market in commodity bonds.
The fit would be particularly good in those countries where the Bank is already lending money.
Instead of denominating a loan to Nigeria in terms of dollars, the Bank would denominate it in terms of the price of oil and lay off its exposure to the world oil price by issuing that same quantity of bonds denominated in oil.
If the Bank lends to multiple oil-exporting countries, the market for oil bonds that it creates would be that much larger and more liquid.
This pooling function would be particularly important in cases where there are different grades or varieties of the product (as with oil or coffee), and where prices can diverge enough to make an important difference to the exporters.
An alternative for some commodity exporters is to hedge their risk by selling on the futures market.
A West African country with newly discovered oil reserves needs to finance exploration, drilling, and pipeline construction, which means that it needs to hedge at a time horizon of 10-20 years, not 90 days.
Another disadvantage of derivatives is that they require a high degree of sophistication –both technical and political.
In the event of an increase in a commodity’s price, a finance minister who has done a perfect job of hedging export-price risk on the futures market will suddenly find himself accused of having gambled away the national patrimony.
If the international financial wizards can get together and act on this idea now, commodity exporters might be able to avoid calamity the next time the world price of their product takes a plunge.
MOSCOW – Whose fault is it that the Boston Marathon was bombed?
Is Russia to blame for 250 years of trying to incorporate the Muslim North Caucasus nations, like the Chechens and Dagestanis, first into the czars’ Christian Orthodox Empire, then into the Soviet Union, and now into President Vladimir Putin’s all-controlling Russian state?
Or is radical Islam the only explanation we need, both in Russia and the West?
The attack by Tamerlan and Dzhokhar Tsarnaev has invariably elicited comparisons to the Saudi-born terrorists who struck the United States on September 11, 2001, or to the Pakistani immigrant Faisal Shahzad, who attempted to set off a car bomb in Times Square in 2010.
Others have suggested that the 26-year-old Tamerlan, an ethnic Chechen, may have witnessed the Russian/Chechen war of 1999, or Russia’s brutal efforts to pacify insurgent fighting in the North Caucasus.
Overwhelmed by the Russian Army’s ruthlessness, it is said, he and his teenage brother chose to spread the violence to US soil.
The problem with this explanation, of course, is that the Tsarnaev brothers were from Kyrgyzstan.
They never lived in Chechnya, and only briefly passed through Dagestan in the early 2000’s.
Chechen President Ramzan Kadyrov, a former rebel, immediately said that the brothers had nothing to do with his republic.
Dzhokhar, now 19, was only eight years old when the family moved to the US – settling in Cambridge, Massachusetts – and by many accounts he was a reasonably well-adjusted American-immigrant.
He recently began to identify with his religious and ethnic origins, and was experiencing academic difficulties at university, but he was well versed in multiple US subcultures.
Tamerlan, a boxer almost good enough to turn professional, was married to an American Christian woman who converted to Islam and became observant with her husband.
Patimat Suleimanova, the Tsarnaevs’ aunt in Dagestan, explained that her older nephew never prayed before he went to America at age 16.
In her view, Tamerlan’s radicalization was made in America.
Essentially, the young men’s stories are not so different from America’s home grown “lone wolves,” typically white and equally disenchanted, who have so often shed blood in the US.
Adam Lanza in Newtown, Connecticut, or James Holmes in Aurora, Colorado, are not viewed as part of a “suspicious” religious or ethnic group.
Even when non-Muslim white men launch explicitly terrorist attacks – for example, Oklahoma City bomber Timothy McVeigh, who murdered 168 people in 1995, or the “Unabomber” Theodore Kaczynski – their offenses are typically regarded as isolated law-enforcement issues, not as terrorism.
By contrast, darker-skinned terrorism suspects, especially Muslims, are considered agents of larger conspiracies that require military involvement and justify human-rights violations.
The initial call by various US congressmen to prosecute Dzhokhar Tsarnaev as an “enemy combatant” is a case in point.
Never mind that Tsarnaev is a naturalized US citizen, and thus cannot be tried by military tribunals, or that he was captured on US soil, not on a battlefield.
To President Barack Obama’s credit, Tsarnaev will be tried in a civilian court.
But that has not altered Americans’ tendency to generalize invidiously about peoples and countries.
Indeed, so rapid was the vilification of Chechens that the Czech Republic’s ambassador to the US felt compelled to issue a statement aimed at preventing any confusion among Americans about his country’s involvement.
The Tsarnaevs’ attack superficially appears to justify Putin’s nationalist politics in the North Caucasus, and to lend credence to his argument that Russia’s two wars against Chechen independence – from 1994 to 1996 and in 1999 – were waged in the name of national security.
In this sense, the Boston bombings have been a diplomatic gift to him.
But just about the only thing that seems clear about this murderous affair is that utterly alienated young men of any religion or ethnicity might suddenly rebel violently.
Dzhokhar Tsarnaev’s reluctant rejection of the materialistic American life – even after the bombing, he continued to tweet, attend campus parties, and go to the gym – appears to have been consolidated by what indeed could have been his older brother’s resentment of Putin’s brutal reassertion of control in the North Caucasus.
In that case, however, the Boston bombings appear to present a paradox.
While the Tsarnaev brothers may have objected to the supposed vanity of the secular state, there is another sense in which they might be right that Russia and the West are not so different from each other.
Just as Russia must deal with a growing wave of fundamentalism that its own policies have fueled, the summary condemnation of Muslims in America will breed more alienation and retribution from within.
After all, the attacks on the Madrid train system in 2004, and on London’s public-transport system in 2005, were not carried out by Saudi or Taliban immigrants, but by young men born and raised in Spain and the United Kingdom.
For years afterward, the US was held out as an exception – a country in which young men, whatever their background, felt truly at home.
The Boston Marathon bombings, like so many acts of mass violence in America, should retire that view once and for all.
LONDON – The world will soon witness a historic test of wills between China and the United States, two superpowers whose leaders see themselves as supreme.
But also at stake is the strategic leadership of East Asia and, eventually, the international order.
The question is whether Chinese President Xi Jinping will feel confident or brazen enough to want to prove it.
The test of wills was hardly China’s choice; but nor does it come as a surprise.
US President Donald Trump’s recently announced import tariffs on steel, aluminum, and other Chinese-made goods are in keeping with his brand of economic nationalism.
And his decision to accept North Korea’s invitation to hold bilateral talks on its nuclear program reflects the same “bring it on” attitude that he applied to the North’s earlier threats of war.
The upcoming test will be historic because it promises to reveal the true strengths and attitudes of the world’s rising power vis-à-vis the weakened but still leading incumbent power.
For better or worse, the result could shape the world for decades to come.
On the trade front, China’s large bilateral surplus with the US could mean that it has more to lose from a trade war, simply because it has more exports that can be penalized.
It is often said that surplus countries will always be the biggest losers in any tit-for-tat escalation of tariffs and other barriers.
For one thing, China is more economically resilient to the effects of a trade war than it used to be.
Trade as a share of its total economic activity has halved in the past decade, from more than 60% of GDP in 2007 to just over 30% today.
As a dictatorship, China can ignore protests by workers and companies suffering from US tariffs.
In the US, where mid-term congressional elections will be held this November, the outcry from exporters, importers, and consumers facing higher costs will be heard loud and clear.
Of course, Trump, too, might ignore protests against his trade war if he is convinced that taking on China will please his core voters and win him re-election in 2020.
But congressional Republicans will probably feel differently, especially if their states or districts are among those being singled out by Chinese import tariffs.
In terms of international diplomacy, Trump’s trade war will help China present itself as the defender of the rules-based international order and multilateral institutions such as the World Trade Organization.
The WTO does not recognize China as a market economy, owing to the Chinese government’s significant involvement in industry and alleged theft of intellectual property.
But China will have a chance to play the victim, while arguing that the US now poses the single largest threat to the global trading system that it helped create.
And if a US-initiated trade war drags on, China’s case will become only stronger as more countries suffer the disruptive effects of tariffs.
Of course, China may choose not to fight Trump’s trade war at all.
With symbolic concessions – such as an agreement to import US-produced liquefied natural gas or promises to offer new guarantees for intellectual-property rights – it could convince Trump to stand down.
But if Xi suspects that a show of strength will bolster China’s international standing while undercutting that of the US, he may decide to act accordingly.
Even barring real progress in the talks, China already looks like a good global citizen.
Over the past year, it has been pressuring the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, to negotiate.
By participating in coordinated economic sanctions against the Kim regime, and by reportedly capping vital exports of oil and other essentials to the North, China has played its part in bringing Kim to the table.
On paper, the fundamental question is whether North Korea will be willing to abandon its nuclear-weapons program, the fruit of more than 30 years of work.
And as China well knows, North Korea would never give up its nuclear weapons without major changes in the military balance on and around the Korean Peninsula.
Kim will likely offer to denuclearize solely on the condition that the US withdraw its forces from South Korea, and perhaps from Japan, too.
Barring that, he would not feel secure enough to do without the nuclear deterrence on which he has staked his regime’s survival.
At best, he could agree on a process through which such extraordinary moves might be discussed at a later date.
In the event of stalemate, it will have gotten Kim to the table and put America in the position of being a refusenik.
And if the US does agree to any military concessions, China’s strategic position will be strengthened.
The only real question for Xi, then, is whether he wants to assert China’s top-dog status now, or sometime in the future.
WASHINGTON, DC – For most of the world’s poor and vulnerable people, secure property rights, including land tenure, are a rarely accessible luxury.
Unless this changes, the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) will be impossible to achieve.
Land tenure determines who can use land, for how long, and under what conditions.
Tenure arrangements may be based both on official laws and policies, and on informal customs.
If those arrangements are secure, users of land have an incentive not just to implement best practices for their use of it (paying attention to, say, environmental impacts), but also to invest more.
An international consensus has emerged regarding the importance of secure land tenure for development outcomes.
In 2012, the Committee on World Food Security, based at the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, endorsed the Voluntary Guidelines on the Responsible Governance of Tenure as the global norm on this front.
In fact, only 30% of the world’s population has legally registered rights to their land and homes, with the poor and politically marginalized especially likely to suffer from insecure tenure.
In Romania, for example, many Roma have less secure farmland tenure than their non-Roma neighbors.
Likewise, in Southeast Asia, hill tribes rarely have legal rights to their indigenous holdings, which are often located in state forests.
In Zimbabwe, a customary divorce settlement may result in allocating all family lands and property (and even children) to the husband, with the wife left to return to her father or another male relative.
In Sarajevo, thousands of apartments have been deemed illegal due to outdated urban plans and missing building permits, locking families’ most valuable assets outside the mainstream economy.
By stifling economic growth, inadequate land-tenure systems perpetuate poverty and marginalization.
But the opposite is also true: strong, properly enforced land rights can boost growth, reduce poverty, strengthen human capital, promote economic fairness (including gender equity), and support social progress more broadly.
Moreover, secure land rights are essential to reduce disaster risk and build climate resilience, which is an urgent imperative at a time when climate change is already fueling more – and more frequent – extreme weather.
When such disasters displace people and destroy their homes, properly maintained land records provide the baseline for compensation and reconstruction of shelters, and help affected communities rebuild better.
Reflecting the importance of secure land ownership to the SDGs’ success, the World Bank Group is now working with developing countries to improve their land-tenure systems and expand the coverage of legally recognized and registered rights.
For example, in Indonesia’s Kalimantan and Sumatra provinces, we are helping to promote the standardization of land rights, with particular attention to women and indigenous communities, while defining state forests’ boundaries using participatory methods for mapping and registration.
Already, World Bank Group efforts have enabled one million hectares of indigenous land in Nicaragua – over 30% of the country’s territory – to be demarcated, titled, and registered, a process that has benefited some of the country’s most vulnerable groups.
This initiative also aimed to improve Nicaragua’s capacity to respond promptly and effectively to emergencies.
New projects are now being prepared in Mozambique and Tanzania to provide customary settlements with communal titles that will ensure legal recognition of their common holdings, thereby strengthening the protection and management of these assets.
In the 2017-2019 period, the World Bank’s portfolio of investment lending for land administration and security of tenure is projected to grow by 39%.
But realizing key SDG targets – which are fully aligned with the World Bank Group’s own twin goals of ending extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity – will require a much larger investment program focused on strengthening land tenure across the developing world.
To that end, the World Bank Group is engaging with partners at the local, national, and global levels to strengthen countries’ commitments and mobilize resources to achieve the ambitious target of achieving adequate land and property rights for all by 2030.
Secure land tenure is thus vital to building the inclusive, resilient, and sustainable communities that will propel economic and social progress well into the future.
Amidst all the headlines about the Democrats gaining control of the United States Congress in the November elections, one big election result was largely ignored.
Although it illuminated the flaws of America’s political system, it also restored my belief in the compassion of ordinary Americans.
In Arizona, citizens can, by gathering a sufficient number of signatures, put a proposed law to a direct popular vote.
This year, one of the issues on the ballot was an act to prohibit tethering or confining a pregnant pig, or a calf raised for veal, in a manner that prevents the animal from turning around freely, lying down, and fully extending his or her limbs.
Those who know little about modern factory farming may wonder why such legislation would be necessary.
Under farming methods that were universal 50 years ago, and that are still common in some countries today, all animals have the space to turn around and stretch their limbs.
Today, however, about 90% of US breeding sows – the mothers of the pigs that are raised and killed for pork, bacon, and ham – spend most of their lives locked in cages that measure about two feet by seven feet (0.6 meters by 2.2 meters).
They are unable to turn around, lie down with their legs fully extended, or move more than a step forward or backward.
Other sows are kept on short tethers that also prevent them turning around.
Veal calves are similarly confined for all their lives in individual stalls that do not permit them to turn around, lie down, or stretch their limbs.
These methods are, essentially, labor-saving devices – they make management of the animals easier and enable units with thousands or tens of thousands of animals to employ fewer and less skilled workers.
They also prevent the animals from wasting energy by moving around or fighting with each other.
Several years ago, following protests from animal welfare organizations, the European Union commissioned a report from its Scientific Veterinary Committee on these methods.
The committee found that animals suffer from being unable to move freely and from the total lack of anything to do all day.
Following the report, the EU set dates by which close confinement of these animals would be prohibited.
For veal calves, that date, January 1, 2007, is almost here.
Individual stalls for sows, already outlawed in the United Kingdom and Sweden, will be banned across the entire EU from 2013.
Measures to improve the welfare of laying hens, which are typically kept crammed into bare wire cages with no room to stretch their wings, are also being phased in.
In the past, when my European friends have asked me why the US lags so far behind Europe in matters of animal welfare, I have had no answer.
When they pressed me, I had to admit that the explanation could be that Americans care less about animals than Europeans.
Then, in 2002, animal welfare advocates put a proposal to ban sow stalls on the ballot in Florida.
To the surprise of many, it gained the approval of 55% of those voting.
Last month in Arizona, despite well-funded opposition from agribusiness, the ban on small cages for sows and veal calves also passed, with 62% support.
Neither Florida nor Arizona are particularly progressive states – both voted for George W. Bush over John Kerry in 2004.
So the results strongly suggest that if all Americans were given a chance to vote on keeping pregnant pigs and calves in such tight confinement, the majority would vote no.
So, to explain the gap between Europe and the US on farm animal welfare, we should look to the political system.
In Europe, the concerns of voters about animal welfare have been effective in influencing members of national parliaments, as well as members of the European Parliament, resulting in national legislation and EU directives that respond to those concerns.
In the US, by contrast, similar concerns have had no discernible effect on members of Congress.
There is no federal legislation at all on the welfare of farm animals – and very little state legislation, either.
That, I believe, is because agribusiness is able to put tens of millions of dollars into the pockets of congressional representatives seeking re-election.
The animal welfare movement, despite its broad public support, has been unable to compete in the arena of political lobbying and campaign donations.
Party discipline is weak, and Congressmen must themselves raise most of the money that they need for re-election – and that happens every two years for members of the House of Representatives.
In Europe, where party discipline is strong and the parties, not the individual candidates, finance election campaigns, money plays a smaller role.
In the US, a nation that prides itself on its democratic traditions, pigs and calves are hardly the only losers.
BRUSSELS – More than 100 days after the United Kingdom voted narrowly to leave the European Union, it remains far from clear what arrangement will regulate cross-Channel trade after Brexit.
Political discussions tend to revolve around three key issues: immigration controls, access to the single market, and passporting rights for financial services.
Many in Britain know exactly what they want: to impose controls on the movement of workers from the rest of the EU, thereby protecting the domestic labor market, but without losing access to the single market or passporting rights, which allow British firms to sell their financial services on the continent.
That was, after all, the kind of deal many leaders of the “Leave” campaign promised before the June referendum.
As German Finance Minister Wolfgang Schäuble has pointed out, access to the single market is inextricably linked to the free movement of people.
Indeed, he has even offered to send Boris Johnson, the UK’s foreign secretary, a copy of the Treaty of Lisbon, where that link is established.
But basic economic principles imply that free movement is, indeed, at least as important as free trade.
It is thus clear that it is in the common interest of the UK and the EU to minimize the losses from the introduction of new barriers through Brexit.
From the point of view of European welfare, it is the size of the trade barriers that matters, not which side is a net exporter or importer.
Low barriers typically have low costs, unless very large volumes of trade are affected.
The good news for the UK is that it probably wouldn’t face substantially higher trade barriers even if it did leave the single market.
After all, the EU has, in general, a liberal trade regime, with low external tariffs.
That is why so many studies do not consider the economic benefits of tariff-free transatlantic trade as the primary reason for pursuing it.
Even if the UK faced some additional barriers – such as new customs requirements and certificates of origin – their impact would most likely be relatively small.
The case of Switzerland – which is even more integrated into EU production chains than the UK – shows that efficient customs administrations on both sides are enough to keep such barriers to a minimum.
In any case, exports of goods to the EU generate only about 6% of the UK’s GDP.
Yet another reason why the introduction of some low trade barriers is unlikely to produce large losses is that the differences in the cost of producing goods in one market or the other are small.
Producing a car in Britain, for example, costs about the same as producing one in Germany.
Productivity and income per worker in the UK remains significantly higher than in, say, Poland.
A worker would get about €25 ($27.70) for an hour of work in the UK, but only €8.50 in Poland.
In other words, not allowing a Polish worker to work in the UK would imply large economic costs for Europe.
Moreover, if British Prime Minister Theresa May follows through on her stated goal of reducing annual net immigration to less than 100,000, the UK would have to implement drastic – potentially costly – measures to close off the UK labor market.
This means that the barriers that EU negotiators are in a position to impose – which largely affect trade in goods – are likely to have a much smaller impact than the UK-imposed barriers, such as quotas on EU workers.
But there is one more issue that negotiators must consider: financial services.
While overall trade in services is unlikely to suffer enormously from Brexit – the internal market for services never worked all that well, anyway – finance constitutes a special case, largely because of the passporting arrangements for banks.
Economists are often ambivalent about the benefits of financial integration, not least because large flows of bank credit can have a serious impact on macroeconomic stability.
Whereas securitization, for example, can help to reduce risk and increase the availability of credit for risky borrowers under the right framework, the 2008 global financial crisis starkly demonstrated that it can imply huge costs if it goes too far.
But steps can be taken to maximize the benefits of cross-Channel provision of financial services after Brexit.
The key is to base decisions not on sustaining the City of London’s role as Europe’s financial hub, but on ensuring that the services provided strengthen Europe’s capital markets.
That would require an emphasis on equity over debt instruments, and on market-based financing over bank credit.
Negotiators must focus on minimizing new barriers to the free movement of labor; indeed, this should be an even higher priority than maintaining the free movement of goods.
And British financial services should be welcomed in the EU, but only if they help it to move away from its bank-centric system and complete the capital market union.
But politics continues to distort discussions, driving leaders to draw red lines on free movement and adopt mercantilist stances on financial services.
It will take some statesmanship on both sides to shift attention to the common good.
OXFORD – Amid all of its other troubles, Ukraine cannot pay its creditors.
The country needs more money, serious reform, and a rescheduling of its debt.
Yet even the best efforts by the International Monetary Fund, the United States, and the European Union to achieve this will be hobbled by investment agreements that they themselves have pressed on Ukraine and many other emerging economies.
Indeed, Ukraine could be left facing a string of complex and costly legal cases.
In recent years, shrewd creditor lawyers have argued that investment treaties give bondholders the same rights as foreign direct investors, and have smuggled sovereign-debt cases into international arbitration proceedings wherever they have found investment treaties with broad, open-ended definitions.
The recent experiences of Argentina, Greece, and Cyprus highlight the “blowback” on sovereign-debt restructuring.
The first such case was Abaclat and Others v. Argentine Republic, which started in 2008.
Thousands of Italian bondholders refused Argentina’s debt-restructuring deal, successfully arguing that the Italy-Argentina investment treaty gave them the right to pursue compensation through investor-state arbitration.
Resolving a sovereign-debt crisis requires a collective agreement by creditors, which can be achieved only by individual investors’ incentive to try to grab their money and run.
That is why investment treaties that leave an opening for holdouts are counterproductive.
The IMF proposed one in 2002; but, in the face of concerted lobbying by investors, the scheme was rebuffed and instead an agreement was reached to use collective action clauses (CACs) in debt contracts.
The Eurogroup, for example, has declared that all eurozone sovereign bonds issued after January 1, 2013, should include CACs, which render a government’s debt-restructuring proposal legally binding on all bondholders if a majority of bondholders accept the deal.
In the Greek case, CACs were retroactively inserted into all Greek-law debt.
This allowed for a faster and more orderly restructuring than otherwise would have been possible.
The troika – the IMF, the European Central Bank, and the European Commission – encouraged the Greek government to insert the collective action clauses.
Yet now that very maneuver is being challenged as expropriation in international arbitration.
The same could easily happen to Ukraine, which has ratified more than 50 investment treaties.
Their relevant clauses are similar – often identical – to those in Greece’s investment treaties, enshrining broad, open-ended definitions of investment that do not exclude sovereign debt.
For starters, the countries that have investment treaties with Ukraine can add annexes making it explicitly clear that sovereign debt is excluded.
Renegotiating more than 50 treaties would be unwieldy, but Ukraine would benefit enormously by renegotiating just one: the US-Ukraine investment treaty.
By some estimates, more than 20% of Ukrainian government debt was recently purchased by a single American investment fund, Franklin Templeton Investments, specializing in distressed debt.
So, before the blowback begins, policymakers would do well to heed the strong precedent for excluding sovereign debt from a US investment treaty.
Although US investment treaties are uniform on most issues, they have remarkably diverse approaches to sovereign debt.
Similarly, the US-Uruguay Bilateral Investment Treaty and the US-Peru Trade Promotion Agreement both have annexes that effectively exclude sovereign debt.
For US policymakers, the decision to add an annex excluding sovereign debt is a tough choice.
On the one hand, US investment treaties are designed to secure the strongest possible protection for US investors overseas.
To remove investment protection – at a time of instability and insecure property rights, no less – is antithetical to the purpose of such treaties.
Given the political and security imperatives of the crisis in Ukraine, however, the alternative is worse.
Doing nothing means allowing US investment funds to pursue enormous compensation cases – likely in the billions of dollars – against a future Ukrainian administration, which, even in the best-case scenario, will be on weak domestic political footing and already saddled with an unpopular austerity program and loan-repayment schedule.
This outcome would be more than a public-relations nightmare; with Russia beckoning, it might well hasten geostrategic disaster.
Ideally, the world would have a well-functioning international mechanism for sovereign-bond restructuring.
Yet before the cameras turn away from Ukraine, officials and leaders can ensure that a future administration there is not left facing bondholders one by one in international arbitration proceedings.
The US and Western Europe have an overriding strategic interest in patching this hole in the international financial architecture, and preventing their private investment funds from aggressively seeking compensation from a future Ukrainian administration.
ISTANBUL – For almost seven decades, NATO has amply demonstrated its ability to fulfill its core mission of deterring a conventional attack against its member countries.
But the threat landscape on NATO’s southern flank is changing, pushing the Alliance toward uncharted waters.
This week’s NATO summit in Warsaw will amount to a litmus test of the Alliance’s ability to adapt to the new more complex security challenges that it faces.
Since the Cold War, when it was positioned as a bulwark against Soviet expansionism, NATO has proved adept at developing responses to conventional threats posed by state actors.
When the threat of ballistic missiles from Iran became potent, it built a missile-defense architecture to deter provocation.
When a resurgent Russia began to generate concerns among the Alliance’s eastern members, it revised its forward posture to reassure them.
NATO’s approach to non-state actors, however, is less well developed.
Indeed, no such approach really existed until the September 11, 2001, terror attacks on the United States, when the notion that terrorist groups could pose a real threat to the West’s security penetrated official thinking for the first time.
That moment became a turning point for NATO, not only because it spurred the first invocation of the collective-defense clause, Article 5, but also because the clause was invoked against an amorphous non-state entity in the mountains of Afghanistan.
Since 2001, NATO has been moving to create a more robust framework to defend its members against non-state actors and asymmetric threats.
Soon after the September 11 attacks, NATO established a “terrorism threat intelligence unit” to bolster its intelligence pooling and analysis efforts.
In 2002, it launched its first-ever “partnership action plan against terrorism,” which was re-branded in 2015 as “counter-terrorism policy guidelines.”
These efforts will culminate at the Warsaw Summit, where NATO should establish a new strategic outlook that accounts for the complex and diffuse security challenges affecting its southern flank.
To be sure, state actors – in particular, an increasingly assertive Russia – remain a potent threat.
After all, beyond putting pressure on NATO’s eastern flank, Russia has been building its military capabilities to NATO’s south.
Given this, any “southern flank strategy” will need to include initiatives to bolster southern countries’ defenses against state actors, such as expanding the Standing NATO Maritime Group 2 in the Mediterranean and accelerating the NATO Response Force’s move toward a more flexible and deterrence-focused posture.
But there is also a more complex set of non-traditional challenges on NATO’s southern flank.
Those challenges include, of course, the ongoing turmoil in the Middle East, which is fueling radical jihadism and spurring mass migration flows.
There is also the prospect of the proliferation of chemical and biological weapons, which have already been used in the Syrian conflict both by President Bashar al-Assad’s regime and the Islamic State.
And there is the risk of state collapse, accompanied by the specter of border change.
NATO’s southern strategy must therefore incorporate policies to improve its capacity to address non-conventional, asymmetric threats.
In particular, NATO should become a more reliable and effective platform for member countries involved in counter-terrorism activities.
For example, the Alliance should develop a terrorism risk-assessment model, with a special focus on its southern flank, and upgrade the amount of actionable intelligence collected by and from partner and member countries.
The Alliance should also seek to enhance its capacity to detect the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and improve its situational awareness of chemical and biological threats.
Though all of these elements are essential to an effective strategy, a political consensus will not be easy to achieve.
One key barrier to agreement is the perennial conflict over the appropriate burden of defense on national budgets – a conflict that is particularly intense in today’s environment of fiscal anxiety.
But there is an even more politically divisive question facing NATO’s leaders in Warsaw: its eastern members continue to perceive Russia as the biggest threat facing the Alliance, and thus demand that more attention and resources be devoted to their protection.
Yet the more diffuse threats faced by the smaller number of southern NATO members may well be more acute.
To the extent that there is a tradeoff, with more resources for the south meaning fewer resources for the east, differences among the threat perceptions of the NATO allies risk producing deadlock.
NATO’s ability to transform its strategic outlook and develop an effective southern strategy will depend on its leaders’ ability to reconcile the interests of these two groups of members.
At a time when tensions are on the rise, it will be a difficult balancing act.
NEW DELHI – With the world’s most developed economies reeling under the incubus of what is already being called the Great Recession, India at the beginning of the year took stock and issued a revised estimate for GDP growth in the 2008-2009 fiscal year.
It is striking that even amid all the doom and gloom assailing world markets, there is no fear of a recession in India.
This is quite a turnabout for an economy that for years had crept along at what was derisively called the “Hindu rate of growth” – around 3% – while much of the rest of Asia shot ahead.
For more than four decades after Independence in 1947, India suffered from the economics of nationalism, which equated political independence with economic self-sufficiency and so relegated the country to bureaucratic protectionism and stagnation.
But, since 1991, India has liberalized its economy and profited from globalization.
Its tech-savvy information-technology pioneers, software engineers, and call-center operators have made the country an economic success story.
India has multiplied its per capita income levels many times over since 1950, and has done so far faster in recent years than Britain or the United States did during and after the industrial revolution.
In the last 15 years, India has pulled more people out of poverty than in the previous 45 – 10 million people a year on average in the last decade.
The country has visibly prospered, and, despite population growth, per capita income has grown faster than ever before.
India’s financial system suffers from few of the creative and risky derivative instruments that caused such problems in the West.
A tradition of conservative banking regulation and a tough-minded Governor of the Reserve Bank (India’s central bank) ensured that Indian banks did not acquire the toxic debts flowing from sub-prime loans, credit-default swaps, and over-inflated housing prices that assailed Western banks.
The negative effect of the US financial setbacks on Indian stock markets, therefore, made little sense, since they bore no relation to the real value of Indian companies.
Instead, the decline in Indian stocks reflected foreign investors’ liquidity problems: they withdrew from holdings in India because they needed their money back home, not because it wasn’t growing for them.
Of course, economies that depend on foreign investment are bound to be hurt nowadays, because those investors have less capital to invest.
First, India has considerable resources of its own to put towards growth, and has proven itself skilled at the art of channelling domestic savings into productive investments.
Second, once things have begun to stabilize in the West, investors looking for a place to put their money will look anew at India, owing to the opportunities for growth and the sheer size of the market.
That said, India has relied much less on foreign direct investment than China, and has even exported FDI to OECD countries.
Despite being seen as a poster child for the benefits of globalization, India is not unduly dependent on global flows of trade and capital.
India relies on external trade for less than 20% of its GDP; its large and robust internal market accounts for the rest.
India’s private sector is efficient and entrepreneurial, and its capital and management skills have proven able to control and manage assets in the sophisticated financial markets of the developed West.
India clearly has the basic systems it needs to operate a twenty-first-century economy in an open and globalizing world.
The terrorists attacked India’s financial nerve-center and commercial capital, a city emblematic of the country’s energetic thrust into the twenty-first century.
They struck at symbols of the prosperity that have made the Indian model so attractive to the globalizing world, a magnet for investors and tourists alike.
Indeed, by striking hotels favored by foreign businessmen and visitors, they undermined the confidence of those whom India needs to sustain its success story.
Terror may add to the time India will need to recover from the economic crisis.
Investors are returning, and FDI inflows this fiscal year are set to exceed the $25 billion received in 2007-08.
At the end of February, Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh assured Parliament that “India would emerge the least affected among the countries of the world from the current economic crisis.”
So, for those looking for signs of recovery from the global economic downturn, India remains the place to watch.
According to the World Bank’s annual assessment of Global Economic Prospects, India’s economy could even triple in size in the next 15 to 20 years.
RAMALLAH – Since the beginning of the year, the French government has been building support for an international conference to restart the Israel-Palestine peace process.
France deserves applause for its brave effort to revive a process that has been going nowhere for the better part of a decade.
When France first made its plans known in January, many dismissed the idea as little more than a diplomatic stunt.
They feared that it would merely give the Israelis another photo opportunity: After the handshakes, ordinary Palestinians would continue to suffer under the occupation.
When it became clear that the French effort was in earnest, and a date was announced for preparatory talks on May 30, the clear timelines encouraged Palestinian officials to sign up to the process.
Israel, the stronger party in the conflict, prefers bilateral talks, which put it in a better position to dictate terms.
The weaker side in such talks does, of course, have a sort of power: the power to say no.
The five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council plus Germany were able to work together to forge the Iranian nuclear deal.
Similar success can be obtained in the Middle East only if all parties focus on finding a solution, and do not let the strong Israelis dictate to the weak Palestinians.
If the French want this process to succeed, they must set out clear timelines, and a date by which the talks must yield results.
After all, the outlines of what is required for a settlement are fairly well understood.
Once there is a deadline, procrastination can’t be part of the negotiating tactics.
And once a timeline is set, the price of failure must be made clear.
Any negotiator knows that the parties to a conflict will be reluctant to make compromises unless there is a price to pay if the talks fail.
When he first announced the French initiative, Laurent Fabius, France’s former foreign minister, said that if the talks break down, France will recognize Palestine (though his successor, Jean-Marc Ayrault, has backed away from this position, saying that recognition would not be automatic).
As a permanent UN Security Council member, France’s recognition of Palestine could be crucial.
The pressure on Israel might become even greater if, by November or December, it became clear that it was not negotiating in good faith.
US President Barack Obama’s administration, by that point in its final weeks, could then play a decisive role, by making the costs of intransigence clear to Israel.
Even if Israeli and Palestinian leaders can be persuaded to sign some kind of deal, it will not stand the test of time unless it is generally regarded as fair.
Deals do require compromises, but no deal will stick if the compromises by one side seem so overwhelming that the resulting agreement is perceived as unjust.
There is considerable regional and international agreement on what would count as a just solution: an independent state of Palestine, roughly around the 1967 borders, a resolution of the refugee problem, and an arrangement to share Jerusalem.
Moreover, it is impossible for the negotiations to be seen as fair if Israel maintains its brutal occupation and continues to build settlements on Palestinian lands.
Finally, the success of the talks requires public support, which can be obtained only if the leaders genuinely give peace a chance.
The average Palestinian – and Israeli, too – needs to believe that peace is possible.
This means changes in Israeli military policy, travel restrictions, and political posturing, and an end to one-upmanship by both sides.
Pierre Vimont, the French special envoy, has been charged by his government with an enormous task, one that he cannot possibly accomplish on his own.
He will need an earnest multilateral effort, clear timelines, a commitment to justice on all sides – and perhaps a miracle.
CAMBRIDGE – There is a certain irony in recent news that Venezuela donated a half-million dollars to Donald Trump’s presidential inauguration through Petróleos de Venezuela (PDVSA), the state-owned oil company.
Venezuela, of course, is a serial defaulter, having done so more times than almost any other country over the last two centuries.
Recently, Venezuela’s despotic socialist government has been so desperate to avoid another default (which would be the country’s 11th since independence) that it mortgaged its industrial crown jewels, including the United States-based refiner Citgo, to the Russians and the Chinese.
(The Citgo brand is especially famous in my hometown of Boston, Massachusetts, where the company’s iconic sign has become a landmark in the environs of Fenway Park, where the Red Sox baseball team plays.)
It is not exactly clear why Venezuelan President Nicolás Maduro is so desperate to avoid defaulting on the country’s foreign debt that he is starving his own people, much the way Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceauşescu did in the 1980s.
With such severe shortages of food and basic medicines, there is little doubt that if and when the autocrat is finally deposed, there will be some eerily familiar horror stories.
It is simplistic to portray the Venezuelan tragedy as an apocryphal tale of what happens when a country is taken over by left-wing populists.
The right-wing governments of the 1980s and 1990s were also corrupt; and, while national income rose, income distribution was among the most unequal in the world.
But it is true that Venezuela’s current horror show is very much a product of two decades of left-wing misgovernment.
There was a time when a contribution such as the one Venezuela made to Trump was a mere pittance in a much larger aid budget.
Under its previous president, the charismatic Hugo Chávez, Venezuela spread its oil money far and wide, mostly to support other populist anti-American governments in the region.
Chávez even funded heating fuel for some low-income households in the US, a program made famous by former US representative Joe Kennedy II’s 2006 television ads.
That was back when high and rising oil prices helped to maintain Venezuela’s revenues even as economic mismanagement sent oil production into a downward spiral.
Mind you, Venezuela was never nearly as rich as the US, so its aid budget was like giving to the poor by taking from the almost poor.
Now, with oil prices having fallen dramatically since Chávez’s death from cancer in 2013, his successor, who has all the charisma of a lifelong apparatchik, is being forced to get by without the same easy revenues.
And while Chávez was also autocratic, he probably won his elections.
Maduro’s election in 2013, by contrast, was a very close affair that many people question; for one thing, the opposition was allowed virtually no television time, even if starry-eyed US academics insisted that Maduro won fair and square.
It is understandable that left-leaning scholars found some of the socialist government’s redistribution and education policies appealing, as Nobel laureate Joseph Stiglitz did when visiting Caracas, the country’s capital, in 2007.
But the left’s willingness to overlook the dismantling of democratic institutions in Venezuela is more reminiscent of right-leaning Chicago-school economists’ relationships with Latin American dictators in the 1970s.
Today, Venezuela’s economy is a full-blown disaster, with the collapse in growth and near-hyperinflation causing widespread human suffering.
Rather, the government gives the military a free hand in running the drug trade, making many generals and officials extremely rich – and able to buy the loyalty of key troops.
And this brings us back to the bizarre spectacle of this economically desperate country helping to fund Trump’s inauguration festivities.
Like Joe Kennedy II, the Trump organizers can plead that if Venezuela wants to spend its money on making life better for its much richer northern neighbor, who are they to say no?
Well, in both cases, the US should have said no: while the aid is transparent, the symbolism of a rich country taking money from a poor neighbor with millions of suffering people is hardly attractive.
And it is particularly bizarre that even as US policy toward Mexico has greatly increased the chances of an anti-American Chávez-type character becoming president there, officials are providing positive publicity to a government that is a caricature of disastrous governance.
Trump’s predecessor, Barack Obama, took a principled stand in US dealings with Venezuela, imposing sanctions to rein in rogue behavior, a policy that drew broad bipartisan support.
The Trump administration needs to stay the course, especially as lower oil prices have weakened the Venezuelan government’s hand.
Instead of bashing Latin America, the US needs to show it can be a steady and principled friend that will not be swayed by corrupt bribes of any type.
ANSHUN, GUIZHOU PROVINCE, CHINA -- The Huangguoshu Waterfall in China’s southwestern Guizhou Province is a magnificent sight, when there is water.
The largest waterfall in Asia, it plunges over a sheer cliff more than 200 feet high in a thundering display of foam, mist, and rainbows.
This part of China’s southwest, known for its abundant rainfall, mountains, underground rivers and caves, and tropical flora, has recently been gripped by a drought that many say is the worst since the Ming Dynasty.
So, after all the tourists that irrigate this poor region with precious income leave the viewing platforms below the falls, authorities close the sluice gates that dam the White Water River on the dangerously low upstream reservoir, and the falls cease.
Then, each morning, before the tourists reappear, they unceremoniously open the gates again, so that the eerily silent falls suddenly revive in a simulacrum of normalcy.
The disturbance to so elemental a part of this region’s natural architecture is a measure of only one of the many kinds of severe weather aberrations – from floods and droughts to unseasonal blizzards and massive dust storms – that have been unsettling China of late.
To try to compensate for these perturbed weather patterns, Chinese officialdom has launched an unprecedented array of costly projects.
These include the titanic $55 billion South-North Water Transfer Project, a massive engineering effort to construct three canals to bring water from China’s normally wet south to its arid north; a widespread campaign to dig ever-deeper wells; a nationwide tree-planting campaign; and even an extensive effort at “weather modification.”
According to Zheng Guoguang, the Director of the China Meteorological Administration, “Science and technology will answer the prayers of those living through the harshest drought in decades.”
He says that two-thirds of China’s almost 3,000 counties have tried artificial methods to induce more rainfall, sometimes resulting in lawsuits over rights to mine passing clouds for water.
Such efforts, Zheng reports, have involved some 6,533 cannons, 5,939 rocket launchers, and numerous aircraft in an attempt to seed clouds across one-third of China’s landmass with dry ice, ammonia, and silver iodide.
But can science and technology really solve problems that are not caused by China alone?
More and more scientists are beginning to suspect that global warming has caused the radically changed patterns of precipitation now seen across China.
If true, China will never resolve droughts such as the current one in Guizhou by itself, regardless of how many large-scale engineering projects the government undertakes, or how well organized remedial efforts are.
When Chairman Mao still reigned supreme, one of his most vaunted principles was zili gengsheng, or “self-reliance.”
Since China had been bullied, invaded, semi-colonized, and even occupied during most of his formative years, he was deeply suspicious that any foreign country – even a “fraternal” Communist ally – could ever be relied upon to leave China alone, much less actually help it.
As a result, the Party leadership became steeped in suspicion and distrust toward the outside world, especially toward the so-called “great powers.”
Even today, with Mao’s revolution long gone and globalization having knit a new fabric of inter-dependence around China, there remains, particularly among older leaders, a residual wariness about relying on collaboration with outsiders, especially when it comes to “core interests.”
But it is not just world markets that have enmeshed China in a new commons.
Issues such as nuclear proliferation and the global environment – and especially climate change – have also snuck up on China’s leaders (and everyone else).
Like it or not, leaders everywhere are now enfolded in an inescapable web.
So, despite China’s predilection for aloofness, cooperation is not merely an option, but a necessity.
This is a difficult adjustment for any country to make, especially one like China, which has a history of imagining itself as being at the center of the world while also remaining an inviolable entity that can close its doors whenever it chooses to do so.
China’s leaders have been committed to a process of “opening” for more than a generation.
But they remain neuralgic about any hint of outside interference, including even the suggestion that their nation’s business might also be the business of other peoples, and vice versa.
The drought in Guizhou, whatever its cause, is a reminder that the fate of China’s people has become inextricably linked to what happens elsewhere, and that no country can opt out or find unilateral solutions separate from the global commonweal any longer.
The global financial crisis, and the botched recovery thereafter, put wind in the sails of political extremism.
France’s National Rally (formerly the National Front), Germany’s Alternative für Deutschland (AfD), Italy’s League party, the Freedom Party of Austria (FPÖ), and the Sweden Democrats have all made electoral gains in the past two years.
To be sure, this explosion of political extremism cannot be explained by economic distress alone.
But the correlation between bad economic events and bad politics is too striking to be ignored.
By bad politics, I mean the xenophobic nationalism and suppression of domestic civil liberties seen in countries with populist governments.
By good politics, I mean the internationalism, freedom of expression, and accountable governance that prevailed during the post-war era of prosperity.
By bad economics, I mean allowing financial markets to dictate what happens to the real economy.
Good economics, by contrast, recognizes a government’s duty to protect its constituents against distress, insecurity, and calamity.
It is very hard for liberals to accept that bad politics can produce good economics, and that good politics can produce bad economics.
Under Prime Minister Viktor Orbán, the country has become increasingly authoritarian.
But the government’s economic program, “Orbánomics,” has a sound Keynesian footing.
By the same token, good politics can certainly coexist with bad economics: Former British Chancellor of the Exchequer George Osborne’s austerity policies condemned the United Kingdom to years of stagnation.
Between nationalists and liberals, it is easier for the former to pursue policies of social protection.
Historically, that of course includes the Nazis, who were National Socialists, and Mussolini, who began his political life as a socialist activist.
Liberals, meanwhile, advocate the free movement of goods, people, and information, whereas a nationalist politics seeks to restrict all three.
True, far-left parties have also made advances since the post-crisis slump.
But history suggests that nationalists have the most to gain from episodes of political and social breakdown.
Classical socialism is the progeny of liberal internationalism, which is to say that it is a globalizing creed; in principle, it knows no national frontiers.
Yet in the face of large-scale economic crack-ups, internationalism becomes precisely the point at issue.
Untethered as it is from national politics, it is accountable to no one.
So, when the international system collapses, nationalists can present themselves as the only alternative.
It can no more tap into popular hostility against immigrants and refugees than the liberal center can.
On the other hand, if the left tries to play up the benefits of immigration, it might drive more people into the arms of anti-immigrant parties.
There could be no objection to economic liberalism if unimpeded markets fulfilled their promise of satisfying individual preferences through the operation of Adam Smith’s “invisible hand.”
The problem, as Joseph Schumpeter understood, is that even if markets often do “work” the way they are supposed to, they are also highly disruptive and prone to periodic breakdowns.
Moreover, while the technological innovations that markets promote bring real benefits in the long run, they tend to leave much economic and social wreckage in their wake.
The so-called Great Recession was not nearly as bad as the Great Depression of the 1930s, and it did not follow a devastating war.
What I will say is that bad economics makes it more likely that bad politics will move from the fringes into the mainstream, as German National Socialism did between 1928 and 1930.
Whether the bad parties make it to power – and how they wield that power – depends on many factors.
But so does the legitimacy and adaptability of the established political system, the scope of welfare provision, electoral politics and political leadership, and the international context.
The rapid rise of extremism today should serve as a wake-up call.
We must uncouple the good politics of liberalism from the bad economics of neoliberalism that produced the disaster of 2008.
That means reinstating the kind of economics that prevailed from the 1940s to the 1970s, until it was swept away by President Ronald Reagan in the United States and Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher in the UK.
Friedrich Hayek was wrong to argue that Keynesian social democracy is a slippery slope to serfdom.
A good economics in our own era would do three things: It would take precautions against 2008-level collapses; it would muster a robust counter-cyclical response to any collapse that does happen; and it would heed popular demands for economic fairness.
Likewise, preserving today’s good politics also requires that we give urgent attention to four topics: the political and social limits of globalization; the financialization of the real economy; the role of fiscal and monetary policy; and the delinking of rewards from work in an era of accelerating automation.
Proponents of liberalism – and those to their left – neglect these issues at their peril.
MEXICO CITY – By all indications, the international community has resigned itself to Russian President Vladimir Putin’s Crimean “land grab,” as US Vice-President Joe Biden has called it.
Once Putin decided he wanted to assume the consequences of his acts, there was very little the United States, the European Union, or the United Nations could do.
Though the region’s countries have the means to stop the growing political, economic, and human-rights catastrophe in Venezuela, they lack the will, while the rest of the world’s attention to Ukraine has removed any pressure on them to act.
In Ukraine, the US and the EU seem to have decided on a sensible course of action – or, rather, on a realistic two-track response – that is unlikely to produce spectacular results, but is certainly preferable to passivity.
First, the sanctions imposed so far – visa cancellations, asset seizures or freezes, and the like – will not give Sevastopol back to Ukraine, but they will eventually bite, at least in certain Russian business sectors.
Whether this unites the oligarchs, or divides them, and whether it forces them to take their money out of Russia, or bring it back home, cannot be predicted.
There are simply no alternatives right now, and applying the entire gamut of sanctions from the outset would leave the EU and the US without further options.
Second, and much more important, a tacit anti-appeasement ultimatum has been issued to the Kremlin: additional expansion in Ukraine will lead to much stronger and more painful sanctions.
This may or may not work, but the decisions and announcements at least have the merit of existing, thereby demonstrating the willingness of the G-7 and others to uphold principles and values to which Russia is, in theory, also committed.
Clearly, the world’s democracies lack perfect options, given everyone’s eminently reasonable reluctance to resort to force.
Given Ukraine’s location, history, and the potential for trouble, the international community’s greater attention to the crisis there than to the disaster unfolding in Venezuela is not surprising.
Recent events in Venezuela imply as many perils and unforeseen, perverse consequences as in Ukraine, and the international community, as well as most Latin American democracies, should be paying much more attention.
Venezuela has some of the world’s largest oil and gas reserves, and is a major exporter (though smaller than ten years ago).
And, for better or for worse, it is a key supplier to certain countries.
Nearly all of the Caribbean, Central America, and some Gulf ports in the United States depend on Venezuelan low-sulfur crude oil for their power plants, refineries, and balance-of-payments positions.
Cuba is the most dramatic case of dependence: Without subsidized Venezuelan petroleum and the enormous sums paid for the Castros’ doctors – some excellent, some fraudulent – the island’s economy would sink, causing a wave of Cubans to leave, as has occurred repeatedly over the past half-century.
This time, though, the consequences for Florida and Mexico could be graver than before.
Targeted repression, imprisonment of opposition leaders, press censorship, shortages, inflation, and wanton violence – Caracas is one the world’s most dangerous cities – have created a situation that appears untenable in the medium term.
The harsh economic and security measures that Venezuela needs to emerge from its current debacle cannot be implemented without some form of consensus, which requires an end to repression and polarization.
Unfortunately, none of this seems likely if left exclusively in the hands of Venezuelans, who have failed repeatedly over the past 15 years to find solutions to their dilemmas.
Some have suggested a papal mediation; others have advocated intervention by a group of Latin American former presidents.
The problem is that no Latin American government, with the exception of Panama, wants to dirty its hands.
The three that count because of their size – Argentina, Brazil, and Mexico – are all frightened of the consequences: Brazil that its companies will lose contracts, Mexico that the Venezuelans will finance opposition to their energy reforms, and Argentina of losing an ally that knows too much.
The other two conceivably relevant countries – Colombia and Chile – refuse to get involved for different reasons.
Colombia needs President Nicolás Maduro’s cooperation to sustain negotiations with the FARC guerrillas; the new Chilean president, Michelle Bachelet, has always had a soft spot for Chavismo and its antics.
In the case of Crimea, the deaths of hundreds of demonstrators in Kyiv and the possible Russian takeover of eastern Ukraine has called into question principles such as non-intervention.
Not in Latin America: the number of students in Venezuela that are killed by government-sponsored paramilitary groups is still viewed as nobody’s business but the Venezuelans’, even though the country is a party to every regional instrument of international human-rights law.
And no outside mediation is feasible without a minimum of censure or criticism of Maduro’s extremism, even if the opposition takes its lumps, too, for some of its factions’ radical, occasionally subversive stances.
Paradoxically, whereas the Western powers are probably powerless in Ukraine, Latin America’s major players could exert great influence in Venezuela.
Economic sanctions on Russia may eventually hurt, and the Kremlin may desist from further encroachment; but the Ukrainian crisis is largely impervious, in the short term, to outside involvement.
In Venezuela, the danger is just as great for everybody, and addressing it is much cheaper and easier.
But doing so requires what most Latin American governments sorely lack: vision and courage.
PRINCETON – On January 1, Derek Parfit, one of the greatest philosophers of my generation, died.
Just a year earlier, in a poll on a leading philosophy website, Parfit had been voted the most important living Anglophone philosopher.
Of all the philosophers I have known since I began to study the subject more than 50 years ago, Parfit was the closest to a genius.
Getting into a philosophical argument with him was like playing chess with a grandmaster: he had already thought of every response I could make to his arguments, considered several possible replies, and knew the objections to each reply as well as the best counters to those objections.
Nor did he appear on television, although late in life, he spoke about effective altruism, and two of those talks can be seen online.
He also published very little before his first book, Reasons and Persons, came out in 1984, when he was 42 years old.
His readers then had to wait another 27 years for his second book, On What Matters, unless they were able to read one of the drafts that Parfit circulated in order to receive suggestions for improvement.
Is it rational always to act in our own interests, or to act in accordance with our present desires, or to bring about the best consequences for everyone, timelessly?
Whereas we commonly take the distinction between our self and others as an all-or-nothing matter, because we assume that we are the same person throughout our life, Parfit argued that our identity changes over time as the psychological connections between our earlier and later selves alter.
Parfit found this view liberating: “Other people are closer,” he wrote, “I am less concerned about the rest of my own life and more concerned about the lives of others.”
In the final part of the book, Parfit asked: What is the optimum population for a country, or a planet?
Should we aim for the greatest possible total quantity of happiness, or the highest average level of happiness?
Assuming that the average level of happiness is positive, these choices will diverge if increasing the planet’s population will reduce the average, but not by enough to offset the fact that now more happy people exist.
In thinking about this question, we can put aside the environmental constraints that provide reasons for not increasing the population, because Parfit is trying to get at an underlying question of value.
He shows that both the “total” and “average” answers have paradoxical or counter-intuitive implications.
But then, so does every other answer that has been proposed since Parfit revived the problem and other philosophers began to offer their own solutions.
If Reasons and Persons could easily have been three separate books, On What Matters really is: the first two volumes were published in 2011, while a third, in press when Parfit died, has just appeared.
In this monumental work, totaling about 1,900 pages, Parfit challenges the idea – almost universally assumed by economists, and by many philosophers from David Hume onward – that the role of reason is to tell us how to get what we want, but not to tell us what to want.
It is, for example, irrational to wish to avoid agonizing pain every day of the week except any future Tuesday.
In order to show that there can be objective truths in ethics, Parfit boldly sought to reconcile three major normative theories: Kantianism, contractualism, and consequentialism.
Adherents of each of these theories are, Parfit suggested, “climbing the same mountain on different sides,” taking their own routes to a common element of truth in each theory.
In On What Matters, Volume Three, Parfit again tried to reconcile three major theories, this time theories about the nature of ethics, and the basis on which one might call an ethical judgment “true.”
Parfit was not only a remarkable philosopher; he was also extraordinarily generous with the resource that was most precious to him: his time.
So concerned was he about not wasting time that he read philosophy while brushing his teeth, and his wardrobe was full of identical shirts and suits so that he would not have to think about what to wear.
Yet when students or colleagues sent him work, he would read it and, whether he agreed with it or not, write detailed comments, sometimes longer than the work itself.
At a time when many people are despairing about current political trends, the penultimate paragraph of On What Matters, Volume Three encourages us to take a longer and more optimistic perspective:
“Life can be wonderful as well as terrible, and we shall increasingly have the power to make life good.
Since human history may be only just beginning, we can expect that future humans, or supra-humans, may achieve some great goods that we cannot now even imagine.
In Nietzsche’s words, there has never been such a new dawn and clear horizon, and such an open sea.”
LONDON – For years, it was assumed, certainly in the West, that, as society developed, religion would wither away.
But it hasn’t, and, at the start of a new decade, it is time for policymakers to take religion seriously.
Whereas Europe’s birthrate is stagnant, the Arab population is set to double in the coming decades, and the population will rise in many Asian Muslim-majority countries.
There are more Muslims in China than in Europe, more practicing Protestants than in England, and more practicing Catholics than in Italy.
In addition, according to the latest surveys, around 100 million Chinese identify themselves as Buddhist.
And, of course, Confucianism – a philosophy rather than a religion – is deeply revered.
Faith remains for many in the United States a vital part of their lives.
Even in Europe, the numbers confessing to a belief in God remain high.
And, of course there are hundreds of millions of Hindus and still solid numbers of Sikhs and Jews.
Around 40% of health care in Africa is delivered by faith-based organizations.
Muslim, Hindu, and Jewish relief groups are active the world over in combating poverty and disease.
In any developed nation, you will find selfless care being provided to the disabled, the dying, the destitute, and the disadvantaged, by people acting under the impulse of their faith.
This is where faith becomes a badge of identity in opposition to those who do not share it, a kind of spiritual nationalism that regards those who do not agree – even those within a faith who live a different view of it – as unbelievers, infidels, and thus enemies.
What has changed is the pressure of globalization, which is pushing the world’s peoples ever closer together as technology advances and shrinks the world.
Growing up 50 years ago, children might rarely meet someone of a different cultural or faith background.
Today, when I stand in my ten-year-old son’s playground or look at his friends at his birthday party, I find myriad different languages, faiths, and colors.
Such a world upends traditions and challenges old thinking, forcing us to choose consciously to embrace it.
And, for those for whom religion matters, globalization can sometimes be accompanied by an aggressive secularism or hedonism that makes many uneasy.
So we must make sense of how the world of faith interacts with the compulsive process of globalization.
Yet it is extraordinary how little political time or energy we devote to doing so.
Extremism based on a perversion of Islam shows no sign of abating; indeed, it will not abate until it is taken on religiously, as well as by security measures.
This extremism is, slowly but surely, producing its own reaction, as we see from Islamaphobic parties’ electoral gains in Europe, and statements by European leaders that multiculturalism has failed.
Of course, throughout time, religion has often been part of a political conflict.
I see this very plainly spending so much time in Jerusalem, where – East and West – there is an emphatic increase in religiosity.
Those advocating extremism in the name of religion are active, well resourced, and – whatever the reactionary nature of their thinking – brilliant at using modern communication and technology.
We estimate that literally billions of dollars every year are devoted to promoting this view of religion.
So my Foundation has a university program – now underway in nine countries – that is designed to take religion out of the sole preserve of divinity schools and start analyzing its role in the world today.
We have another program – in 15 countries, with others set to join – that links high school students across the world through interactive technology to discuss their faith and what it means to them.
And we have an action program through which young people work with those of another faith to raise awareness of the Millennium Development Goals, the United Nations-led program to combat world poverty.
The Alliance of Civilizations, begun by Spain and Turkey, is one example.
It has to be taken down into the grassroots of nations, especially into the media of their young people.
Finally, religious leaders must accept a new responsibility: to stand up firmly and resolutely for respecting those of faiths different from their own.
We must demonstrate the loving nature of true faith; otherwise, religion will be defined by a battle in which extremists seize control of faith communities and secularists claim that such attitudes are intrinsic to religion.
For, above all, it is in this era of globalization that faith can represent reason and progress.
HAARLEM – In 1899, the German-American scientist Jacques Loeb engineered the asexual reproduction of sea urchins through artificial parthenogenesis (the manipulation of egg cells to enable embryonic development without fertilization).
His speculation about complete parthenogenesis in mammals – not to mention his use of the term “immaculate conception” to describe the process – prompted public concern about whether scientists should be “playing God.”
With the International Stem Cell Corporation (ISCC) seeking patents in Europe for a technology that produces stem cell lines from the parthenogenetic activation of an unfertilized ovum, the time has come to answer that question.
Problems with the patenting of parthenogenetically activated cells are nothing new.
Such cells resemble human embryos, which, under European Union patent law, cannot be patented.
Following a ruling by the European Court of Justice (ECJ) in 2011 that those cells constitute human embryos, patent applications for parthenogenetic cells in the United Kingdom and other countries have been delayed and even rejected.
(The ISCC does hold patents for its stem cells in the United States.)
But on December 18, 2014, the ECJ reversed its 2011 ruling, determining that an unfertilized human ovum stimulated by parthenogenesis “does not constitute a human embryo, if it does not in itself have the inherent capacity of developing into a human being.”
The ECJ based its ruling on written (unpublished) observations submitted by EU member states.
The UK High Court then remitted the application to the UK Intellectual Property Office, which granted the patent in October.
The ECJ did not rule explicitly that parthenogenesis of human ova is patentable.
It did not examine whether parthenogenesis constituted “a process for the cloning of a human being,” which would not be patentable under EU law.
And it did not consider whether the activated egg cell – a “parthenote” – counts as a germ cell, which also cannot be patented in the EU (though it did pose the question to the applicants at the hearing).
The national court and the patent office did not, as far as we can establish from their websites, examine these exclusions from patentability either.
Nor did they consider that parthenotes develop until the blastocyst embryonic stage, harboring the capacity for full attachment.
But even if the ISCC’s patent applications are not excluded on these grounds, there is another potential roadblock for applicants: Under European law, an invention can be patented only if its commercial exploitation is deemed not to controvert “ordre public” or morality.
As Loeb pointed out more than 100 years ago, when it comes to inventions involving bodily materials and biological processes, moral questions are difficult to answer.
They should not, it now seems clear, be left to the patent office or even the courts.
In fact, the European Patent Office (EPO) is not particularly committed to assessing the moral implications of the patents it grants; in its view, “ordre public” would be violated only in the extreme case of a truly outrageous invention.
As a result, while the application procedure allows for third parties to submit to the patent office their observations on the claimed invention’s patentability, it is unlikely to spur a genuine assessment of an application’s moral implications.
An opposing third party would have to shoulder the entire burden of proof, while the patent office avoided taking any real action, in order to avoid “presumptuous” interference in the public debate.
As for the courts, the recent case highlighted the absence of a procedural mechanism to ensure consideration of a patent’s morality.
So who should answer questions about an invention’s implications for “ordre public”?
Inclusive, transparent, and effective public debate about these potentially consequential issues demands, first and foremost, that citizens are well informed.
After all, when it comes to technological advances relating to biological materials and processes, this is only the beginning.
On December 24, 2014, just six days after the ECJ’s ruling, scientists published the results of their efforts to make rudimentary egg and sperm cells starting from a person’s skin cells.
There are also pending patent applications for a novel form of genetic manipulation – CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing – which a team of Chinese researchers has already attempted to use to edit the genome of a human embryo.
Notably, under the ECJ’s “inherent capacity” definition, the embryos used in that experiment would not constitute a human embryo, and thus would not be excluded from patentability.
As the International Summit on Human Gene Editing recently stated, it would be irresponsible to proceed with a clinical use of germline editing without broad societal agreement.
If, based on an understanding of the processes and their implications, a majority of a country’s citizens find them to controvert morality, democratic principles would demand a government response.
In line with the EU’s 1998 biotech directive, debates should occur on a country-by-country basis.
In Switzerland, a substantial majority of voters decided in 2004 to ratify the Stem Cell Research Act, which regulates how human embryonic stem cells are produced and used in research.
Swiss stem-cell law is now more restrictive than that of, say, the UK, but less restrictive than that of Germany.
Specifically, Swiss law prohibits the development of parthenotes, the derivation of stem cells from parthenotes, and the use of such stem cells.
It also excludes from patentability processes for parthenogenesis using human germ cells, as well as parthenotes created by such processes.
These prohibitions are based not just on the need to protect human embryos, but also on concerns relating to the availability of donated egg cells, on which parthenogenesis depends – an issue that neither the courts nor the patent office have considered.
A country-by-country, public-driven approach to assessing the morality of inventions involving biological materials and processes would reinforce both EU law and democratic principles.
As recent rulings have made clear, the current system is far from adequate when it comes to upholding ordre public.
GENEVA – Every year, more than 200 million people are affected by natural disasters.
Many will bear the brunt of recurring floods, storms, or droughts, and the majority of them will be women and girls.
In fact, in all but the poorest and most poorly run countries, deaths resulting from weather-related disasters are on the decline.
What is not on the decline, though, is our exposure to risk and the high price that we pay in terms of lost jobs, destroyed or damaged homes, and disruption to education, health services, and transport infrastructure.
Just as the most expensive hospital is the one that collapses during an earthquake, so the most expensive disaster-management plan is the one that fails to tackle the root causes of recurring disasters.
A combination of inept urban planning and ignorance of the true economic cost of such events can all too easily allow valuable community assets to be swept away.
The most visible is the structural approach, which invests money wisely in flood protection, drainage, preservation of wetlands and forests, and remedial action – based on sound risk assessment – to protect valuable infrastructure.
The other, non-structural approach focuses on early warning systems, public policy, legislation, insurance, knowledge, education, training, and community participation.
It should also focus on issues that make particular groups of people vulnerable because of their gender, age, religion, or poverty.
We know that some of the most powerful recovery programs in the wake of disasters are driven by women who have survived the worst.
Countries that do not actively promote the full participation of women in education, politics, and the workforce will struggle more than most when it comes to reducing risk and adapting to climate change.
Gender equality is thus an essential element of our work in building resilience to disasters and reducing the risk to lives, jobs, and property.
It is also, literally, a matter of life and death if women and girls are not empowered to participate fully in disaster management and planning.
This year, on the International Day for Disaster Reduction, we want to shine a light on women and girls, and to recognize what they are already doing to build their communities’ resilience in places where gender is not a barrier to their full participation in public life.
We need to appreciate what women and girls are achieving by putting their experience and knowledge to good use in designing disaster plans and identifying areas for improvement in urban planning and early warning systems.
They all have a right to be equipped for survival, and they all have a right to contribute to keeping their communities safe from harm.
We need more women volunteering at the community level, and we need more women in senior positions as disaster managers.
A world in which exposure to disaster is growing exponentially – and causing ever-higher economic losses – needs all the female help that it can get.
The UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) is observing it on October 12 this year.
MOSCOW – Watching Russia’s worrying trajectory under President Vladimir Putin, many foreign observers ask how a leader who is so apparently driving his country toward the abyss can remain so popular.
The answer is simple: Putin’s supporters – that is, a hefty majority of Russians – do not see the danger ahead.
According to the independent Levada Center, Putin’s approval rating increased from 65% in January to 80% in March, immediately after Russia’s annexation of Crimea.
The rate reached its peak in early August, at 87%, when many believed that Russia and Ukraine were on the brink of all-out war.
Though it fell after that, to 84% in early September, the drop is within the margin of error.
In other words, there is no basis to claim that Putin’s approval rating is declining.
Putin’s startlingly high popularity certainly cannot be attributed to a positive view of state structures in general.
They give low grades to specific agencies, consider most officials to be corrupt, and rate the government’s performance on most issues as mediocre, at best.
Instead, Russians’ approval of Putin is rooted in the fact that there is no alternative.
Approval ratings in this context are not tools for comparing politicians’ performance and prospects, and thus for compelling them to do better or risk being voted out in the next election.
During his first two terms, Putin was a strong source of hope, owing largely to the rapid increase in Russians’ incomes.
In 2012, this growth began to wane – and so did Putin’s popularity.
His 63-65% approval rating prior to the annexation of Crimea appeared high by Western standards, but was low compared to his previous record – and dangerously close to levels that would threaten his leadership.
After all, an authoritarian regime built around a charismatic leader requires more than middling public support if it is to avoid unrest and violence.
In an attempt to recapture his former popularity, Putin implemented salary increases for teachers, doctors, and police officers, putting regional budgets under strain in the process.
But higher incomes did not translate into improvements in people’s standard of living or the quality of public services, leaving Putin’s approval rating flat, with some of his opponents even taking to the streets to protest his leadership.
And, contrary to the regime’s expectations, the Winter Olympics in Sochi also failed to revive Putin’s popularity.
With the economy showing no sign of recovering the robust growth rates that had bolstered Putin’s popularity in the past, regaining support would have required undertaking the daunting task of fulfilling citizens’ demands for better education, improved health-care services, and more affordable housing.
For Putin, the timing of the political eruption in Ukraine – with protesters eventually forcing the Kremlin-supported president, Viktor Yanukovych, to flee the country – could not have been more ominous.
Quashing perceptions of Putin as a “loser” in Ukraine became a top priority in Moscow.
The strategy that emerged, beginning with the annexation of Crimea, delivered results almost immediately.
The Russian public moved into “emergency mode,” with Putin’s approval rating soaring above 80%.
In such a politically charged context, the sociologist Boris Dubin observed, symbolic acts are more compelling than, say, economic considerations.
Indeed, complaints about stagnating incomes and poor public services gave way to displays of unqualified support for the government, with citizens declaring their willingness to shoulder the costs of confronting the West.
Sharply divisive official rhetoric and the evocation of war imagery by state-owned media certainly played a role.
But there is another, less obvious factor at work: Russia’s lack of debt.
According to the professional services firm Deloitte, mortgage debt in Russia is 20 times lower, on average, than in the European Union.
And the National Agency for Financial Studies reports that only 2% of Russians are prepared to take on a mortgage, owing largely to the uncertainty that plagues the market.
For Western societies – weighed down by credits, contracts, and other obligations – conflict is extremely costly, so they tend to resist it, and even turn on leaders who suggest it.
Ordinary Russians, by contrast, are willing to pin their hopes on a single charismatic figure, not only because they have fewer promising alternatives, but also because they face fewer constraints in doing so.
In this sense, Russians have come to depend on their belief in Putin as much as he depends on their support.
Instead of serving as a source of stability, as it did in the past, this mutual dependence is driving Russia toward political and economic isolation – with serious consequences for ordinary Russians’ livelihoods.
The challenge facing Russians is to ensure that, when it does, they have broken their destructive dependence on belief in him.
(Foreign observers, too, should abandon the habit of focusing all of their attention on the person at the top.)
In the meantime, no one can predict the ends to which Putin will go to prop up his presidency.
Iran’s quarreling and competing leaders have decided, by their acts, to reject the offer by Europe and the United States of a nuclear reactor, aircraft spare parts, economic cooperation, and more in exchange for giving up uranium enrichment.
Many people hoped that Iran’s leaders, despite their extremism, would accept the offer if only to avoid sanctions – which are sure to come even if China and Russia refuse to support them in the United Nations Security Council.
The US and Europe are united this time, and can effectively cut off Iran from world banking, bar Iranian leaders from traveling to the West, and stop exports to Iran of everything but food and medicine.
Instead of waiting passively for sanctions, Iran’s leaders decided to start a Middle East crisis by organizing attacks against Israel.
Their aim is to discourage the US and the Europeans from starting another crisis – financial markets and everyday politics in Europe can tolerate only so much conflict.
They may also hope to shatter the unified EU/US position that now exists.
Moreover, Iran’s claim to leadership in the Muslim world is being undermined by the conflict in Iraq, where Iran supports the Shia militias that are killing Sunnis.
Every bloody day of bombings and executions in Iraq reminds Arabs that the Iranians are neither Arab nor Sunni.
Iran’s move was prepared in a series of meetings with both Hamas and Hezbollah in Lebanon.
Khaled Mashal, Hamas’s overall leader, who lives under Syrian protection in Damascus, traveled to Tehran, where he received some $50 million in badly needed cash.
Although an offshoot of the Sunni Muslim Brotherhood, whose Arab financial supporters loathe the Ayatollahs, Hamas decided to cooperate in Iran’s scheme because it was diplomatically isolated and cut off from Western funding due to its refusal to recognize Israel.
Hamas acted by increasing rocket attacks on nearby Israeli territory, and by launching a raid into Israel itself, killing two soldiers and capturing another.
That provoked Israeli retaliation, starting the Gaza end of the crisis that Iran wanted.
As for the impact on lives in Gaza, Hamas – like Yasir Arafat – has again shown itself to be more devoted to the idea of Palestine than to the welfare of Palestinians.
It was far more costly to get Hezbollah to serve Iran’s strategy.
While it retains a heavily armed, salaried, and uniformed guerilla/terrorist force of some 5,000, its leader, Hassan Nasrallah, has been striving for years to build Hezbollah into a legitimate political party and the main representative of Lebanon’s Shia.
This effort was so successful that Hezbollah now has two ministers in the government.
But to be accepted by other Lebanese, and to some extent even to retain the support of fellow Shia, Hezbollah had to agree to join the Lebanese consensus on the priority of reconstruction and economic recovery after years of civil war.
Hezbollah is under order by the UN Security Council to disarm and disband its militia, but it claimed that even after Israel’s full withdrawal from Lebanon in 2000, it needed its weapons to continue to liberate “Lebanese territory.”
That refers to a tiny fragment of land, the so-called Sheba farms, declared by UN inspectors to be in Israel, but which Hezbollah claims as part of Lebanon.
Other Lebanese political parties agreed that Hezbollah could keep its weapons to fight there – but only on condition that it keep the peace on the rest of the border.
That is the condition Nasrallah violated by ordering an attack on an Israeli patrol nowhere near the Sheba farms and launching rockets into Israeli territory.
For the Israeli coalition government headed by Prime Minister Ehud Olmert, matters are relatively simple.
It ordered the withdrawal from Gaza in order to stop the cycle of violence there, on the presumption that Israeli territory proper would not be attacked.
But the possibility of attack was of course anticipated, and military planners determined that the only possible response was to counterattack as heavily and for as long as might be needed, until Palestinian attacks would stop, whether from exhaustion or agreement.
Hamas’s control of the Palestinian Authority does not diminish or increase the need for Israeli military action, but it does increase its political benefits, because the fighting and destruction tells Gaza’s population that their rulers are endangering their physical survival.
As for Hezbollah, the Israeli military response is by no means confined to retaliation.
Over the years, Hezbollah has received and stored several thousand rockets and some one hundred longer-range missiles from Iran.
Recently, and very revealingly, two Iranian leaders threatened Israel with bombardment by Hezbollah’s rockets if Israel attacked Iran’s nuclear installations.
Thus, Israel is using the opportunity brought by the current fighting to search out and destroy Hezbollah’s underground and other hidden sites where it keeps its rockets and missiles.
Israel’s political aim is to destroy Hezbollah’s position as a legitimate Lebanese political party by exposing it as the paid agent of Iran, which serves foreign interests at grievous cost to Lebanon.
So Israel is blocking Lebanon’s ports from the sea, has breached the runways of all three jet-capable airfields, including Beirut’s international airport, and remains ready to destroy generating plants and other high-value targets, if necessary, to generate sufficient political pressure on Hezbollah.
If Lebanon’s political forces and Nasrallah’s followers cannot get him to revert to a truce, Israel will bomb more targets, including Nasrallah’s offices in south Beirut.
If more missiles are launched, Israel will cross the border deep into Lebanese territory.
Of course, in both Gaza and southern Lebanon, the outcome is pre-determined by the one-sided military balance.
The only open question in both places is how much damage Israel will need to inflict to obtain new cease-fires.
President Cardoso has gotten his second term by the skin of his teeth, not with the mandate for which he hoped.
Cardoso did just about anything to get reelected: spend, borrow, just keep the economy alive until election day.
To keep money coming, he shortened the maturity of domestic and foreign liabilities; to keep the music going he gave state governments leeway to spend money they didn't have.
Almost, for capital flight is now rampant - $40 billion - and this does not count money the government spent behind the scenes buying back debt to support prices in world markets.
The budget deficit is 8% of GDP; the current account deficit comes to 4% in a year where growth is near zero.
In fact, there is substantial skepticism, witnessed by capital flight to the order of 4-5 billion $US weekly.
The IMF package of $30 billion - don't ask how much of that money is real and can be used - will not provide much in terms of confidence.
Confidence will only come from a dramatic program that puts paid to the awful macroeconomics of two decades and creates a well-functioning market economy of the kind Argentina established early in the 1990s.
The plan hatched by the IMF and Brazil is this: a 2.4% cut in the budget, for more is said to be "politically impossible."
That cut is supposed to instill confidence, cause interest rates to fall from their current 30% real level, stop capital flight and thus bring stability.
Chances of that happening are not zero, but they don't exceed 20%.
First and least, the President may not get his 2.5% budget cut.
Cardoso never made a difficult decision; he only knows spending and borrowing, pay-offs for a second term.
He seems to think that Brazil, like some big firms, is simply "too large to fail."
Next and importantly, if budget cuts happen, they will create a recession: the estimate for Brazil is that a 2.5% budget cut will cause a 3% loss in GDP unless there is a dramatic offset from interest rates and confidence.
As in Hong Kong, investors will argue that, in a recession, the temptation to devalue your way out of it is just too overwhelming.
Hence interest rates will stay high, the budget will not improve, recession will weaken Cardoso's political base, and further budget cutting becomes doubtful as a vicious cycle ensues.
With capital flight intensifying and domestic debt refinancing becoming ever harder, its a short step to capital controls and, perhaps, an uncontrolled currency problem.
Yes and true, but they may well have reached the end of their luck.
Needless to say, if Brazil fails it will take much of Latin America with it.
With the IMF in bailout frenzy, and Brazilian policymakers in denial, don't count on either for a successful program.
* the budget must be improved over and beyond what comes from any fall in interest rates;
* the economy must reduce statism, its rules must be made more transparent, and flexibility and competitiveness must be enhanced.
A currency board is the only plausible way for investors and the public to believe that the exchange rate is safe.
That is counter-cultural for Brazil, but anything less is unaffordable.
Public debt must be lengthened - unpleasant, but it has ample precedent.
Undertaking such a lengthening while events can be controlled need not cause any losses other than taking away the illusion of liquidity which investors now entertain but could not exercise because Brazil could not pay them.
A lengthening of much of the debt reduces interest burdens, stabilizes public finance and thus supports the currency.
But Brazil must go beyond "time out" measures on its debt by making a major effort toward a balanced budget.
Cuts must go well beyond 2.5% to create confidence that the Real Plan finally has its counterpart in fiscal stabilization.
Lastly, because the currency board freezes the exchange rate, stable rules and flexibility of wages and prices will need to carry the heaviest burden in making Brazil competitive.
Trimming the budget won't solve Brazil's problem; it simply invites a crisis a few months down the road.
Little comfort is to be taken if Brazil's crisis is less extreme than Russia's, but surely it is time tell the IMF to start adopting winning strategies rather than gamble on the seemingly less painful options peddled by client governments.
In order to allow Cardoso to win and keep the music playing, the IMF bought into the idea that Brazil's problem is the budget, not debt or the exchange rate, and that the budget is the fault of the Brazilian Congress.
Having peddled the story, the IMF is now locked into asking for a bit on the budget and handing over a big bailout package in return.
Here you should recall Keynes' saying: "in the street it is more acceptable to fail by conventional means than to succeed by unconventional ones."
It explains the failure in Russia and, quite likely, the coming failure in Brazil.
VIENNA – Of the many problems that weak global economic conditions have brought into relief, corruption is among the most persistent.
Without collective efforts to combat it, corruption will continue to erode public confidence in institutions and governments, impeding economic, political, and social development.
Economic insecurity and political volatility create new opportunities for exploitation and inspire increasingly sophisticated methods for carrying out corrupt activities.
As businesses struggle to compensate for falling domestic revenue by increasing their global market share, resisting temptation becomes increasingly difficult.
And some studies have noted a sharp rise in illicit financial flows – a phenomenon that inevitably drains money from the poorest countries.
International institutions like the United Nations and the World Bank are working hard to encourage action in this area.
December marks the tenth anniversary of the UN Convention Against Corruption – the only global, legally binding treaty of its kind.
The UNCAC, to which more than four-fifths of the world’s countries are committed, is underpinned by a peer-review mechanism that monitors its effectiveness.
With more measures set to be implemented and enforcement steadily improving, the challenge now is execution.
The UN Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) supports the UNCAC’s peer-review mechanism and is helping countries to reform and strengthen their anti-corruption capacity through legislation, institution-building, and enforcement.
For its part, the World Bank is investing in programs that promote good governance worldwide, while maintaining a robust investigation, enforcement, and prevention capacity to manage risks and root out shady practices.
Through the Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative, the World Bank and the UNODC are bringing to bear their knowledge, skills, and experience to help countries recover assets siphoned off by corrupt officials.
Keeping corruption at the top of political and business leaders’ agenda and ensuring that societies remain vigilant will require strong and sustained effort from actors at all levels – from international institutions to governments, businesses, and ordinary citizens.
While it may not be possible to eradicate corruption in our lifetime, much can be done to lay the groundwork for a corruption-free future.
Corruption is not “how business gets done” or “how the world works.”
Indeed, experience shows that a zero-tolerance policy improves companies’ bottom lines and enhances governments’ effectiveness.
Likewise, corruption is not limited to the developing world, nor is it “culturally biased.”
No one prefers to live in a society where bribes must be paid to secure basic public services like health care and education.
Eliminating corruption will be possible only with an effective combination of smart prevention strategies and robust law enforcement, underpinned by the belief that greed can be unlearned, accountability can be taught, and impunity can be terminated.
Prevention should begin with education aimed at raising citizens’ expectations of their leaders.
In politics and business, integrity and accountability must be the rule, not the exception.
Knowledge-sharing across countries could illuminate the most effective strategies for achieving this goal.
To strengthen enforcement, penalties for misconduct must be proportionate not only to the crime’s severity, but also to the perpetrator’s profits.
A corporate giant has little incentive to change its practices if the fines imposed on it amount to, say, less than a week’s earnings.
Moreover, settlements that resolve transnational bribery cases must satisfy two basic criteria: a settlement in one country should not preclude another from enforcing its own laws and prosecuting the bribe’s beneficiaries; and any settlement must allow affected countries to recover stolen assets, regardless of where they end up.
Global economic malaise is no excuse to delay anti-corruption reform.
In fact, a more honest, transparent global system free of corruption would support stronger, more inclusive economic growth and development.
HONG KONG – With world leaders meeting at the end of this week at the G-20 summit in Cannes, France, the next economic minefield that they will face is already coming into view.
It is likely to take the form of an opaque global credit glut, turbocharged by the fragile mixture of too-big-to-fail global banking with a huge and largely unwatched and unregulated shadow banking sector.
Federal Reserve Board Chairman Ben Bernanke and others have blamed the financial crisis of 2008 on a global savings glut, which fuelled flows of money from high-savings emerging-market economies – especially in Asia – that run chronic balance-of-payments surpluses.
According to this school of thought, excessive savings pushed long-term interest rates down to rock-bottom levels, leading to asset bubbles in the United States and elsewhere.
But Claudio Borio and Piti Disayat, economists at the Bank for International Settlements, have argued convincingly that the savings-glut theory fails to explain the unsustainable credit creation in the run-up to the 2008 crisis.
They have shown that the major capital inflows were not from emerging markets, but from Europe, where there was no net balance-of-payments surplus.
The alternative theory – of a global credit glut – gained more ground with the release last week of the Financial Stability Board’s report on shadow banking.
The FSB report contains startling revelations about the scale of global shadow banking, which it defines as “credit intermediation involving entities and activities outside the regular banking system.”
The report, which was requested by G-20 leaders at their summit in Seoul last November, found that between 2002 and 2007, the shadow banking system increased by $33 trillion, more than doubling in asset size from $27 trillion to $60 trillion.
This is 8.5 times higher than the total US current-account deficit of $3.9 trillion during the same period.
The shadow banking system is estimated at roughly 25-30% of the global financial system ($250 trillion, excluding derivatives) and at half of total global banking assets.
This represents a huge regulatory “black hole” at the center of the global financial system, hitherto not closely monitored for monetary and financial stability purposes.
Its importance was exposed only by analysis of the key roles played by structured investment vehicles (SIVs) and money-market funds (MMFs) in the 2008 meltdown.
The shadow banking system is complex, because it comprises a mix of institutions and vehicles.
Investment funds other than MMFs account for 29% of total, and SIVs make up 9%, but the shadow system also includes public financial institutions (such as the government-backed mortgage lender Fannie Mae in the US).
They are some of the largest counterparties with the regular banking system, and their combined credit creation and proprietary trading and hedging may account for much of the global liquidity flows that make monetary and financial stability so difficult to ensure.
The trouble is that, by 2010, the shadow banking system was about the same size as it was just before the 2007 market crash, whereas the regulated global banking system was 18% larger than in 2007.
That is why the FSB report pinpoints the shadow banking system, together with the large global banks, as sources of systemic risk.
But the global problem is likely to be much larger than the sum of its parts.
Specifically, global credit creation by the regular and shadow banking systems is likely to be significantly larger than the sum of the credit creation currently measured by national statistics.
First, credit that can be, and is, created offshore and through off-balance-sheet SIVs is not captured by national balance-of-payments statistics.
In other words, while a “savings” glut may contribute to low interest rates and fuel excess credit creation, it is not the main cause.
Second, the volatile “carry trade” is notoriously difficult to measure, because most of it is conducted through derivatives in options, forwards, and swaps, which are treated as off-balance sheet – that is, as net numbers that are below the line in accounting terms.
Third, the interaction between the shadow banking system and the global banks is highly concentrated, because the global banks act as prime brokers, particularly for derivative trades.
Data from the US Comptroller of Currency suggest that the top five US banks account for 96% of the total over-the-counter (OTC) derivative trades in the US.
Indeed, the nightmare scenario haunting the world is the collapse of another shadow banking entity, causing global trade to freeze, as happened in 2008.
The Basel III agreement on capital adequacy and other recent reforms still have not ring-fenced trade financing from these potential shocks.
We urgently need to monitor and understand the role of shadow banking and the too-big-to-fail banks in creating the global credit glut.
Obtaining a full picture of global monetary and credit numbers and their determinants is a vital first step.
So far, the G-20’s call to “think globally” has turned into “act locally.”
We hope that the G-20 leaders will think systemically at Cannes, and act nationally and cooperatively to defuse the global credit glut minefield.
WASHINGTON , DC – In recent decades, economists have been struggling to make use of the concept of human capital, often defined as the abilities, skills, knowledge, and dispositions that make for economic success.
Yet those who use the term often assume that to conceptualize a phenomenon is a first step to manipulating it.
And, indeed, “human-capital policy” is now much in fashion.
But what if many of the abilities and dispositions in question are a product of history, capable of being understood and explained but not readily replicated?
Simon Kuznets, one of the twentieth century’s great economists, was a pioneer of human-capital theory.
Not long before he died, Kuznets recommended to a young colleague that one ought study the role of Jews in economic life.
By and large, economists and other social scientists have neglected the history of Jews and capitalism, for reasons that are understandable, though unconvincing.
For most economists, the extent to which modern capitalism has been shaped by earlier cultural predispositions is a source of puzzlement at best, if not merely a factor to be dismissed.
Such cultural considerations simply do not fit into the categories in which equation-fixated economists are predisposed to think.
When economists examine “human capital,” they prefer measurable criteria such as years of schooling.
To the extent that human capital involves character traits and varieties of “know-how” that are transmitted within the realms of the family and the community, rather than by formal education, it becomes both methodologically elusive and difficult to manipulate by public policy.
A look at the historical experience of the Jews shows that while most Jews were mired in poverty at the beginning of the twentieth century, over time they tended to do disproportionately well in societies that allowed them to compete on an equal basis.
That was the case first in central and western Europe, and then in the United States.
In search of economic niches not already occupied by others, Jews frequently created markets for new products and services.
The fastest growing sectors of the economy since the late nineteenth century have been those loosely classified as “service industries,” often involving the dissemination of information and entertainment – activities in which Jews have been especially prominent, from publishing to vaudeville and from movies to commercial sports.
They also tended to do disproportionately well in the learned professions – such as medicine, law, and accounting – that are so central to modern capitalist society.
The fact that Jews were long a minority subject to discrimination is sometimes given as a reason for their tendency to devote themselves to commerce, finance, and the professions.
Yet not all minorities long subject to discrimination necessarily succeed under conditions of market competition.
For one thing, Jews had more experience with commerce than most other groups, and the tacit knowledge of buying, selling, and calculating advantage that was passed on in families with ties to business helps explain why Jews tended to be better at it.
Moreover, in much of Europe, Jews had long been excluded from most of the established economy of land ownership, and from many other fields that were reserved for Christians.
So they learned to be on the lookout for new opportunities in underserved markets, working as peddlers, for example, or creating new products, or new forms of marketing.
Jews were spread across many countries, but to some extent shared a common language and a sense of common fate.
So they were more aware of distant opportunities, had more international contacts, and were disproportionately active in international trade.
In addition, Jews had a religious culture that promoted universal adult literacy – at least for men – and a culture that respected book learning.
As a result, Jews were highly oriented toward education, and willing to defer current pleasures and income to obtain more of it.
Such factors provide a sense of why attention to the history of Jews under capitalism helps us to understand capitalism more generally.
It reminds us that much of success in a capitalist society is based on cultural and historical factors that produce qualities such as innovativeness, willingness to tolerate risk, and willingness to defer gratification through savings and education.
These cultural traits are difficult to quantify, so economists are uncomfortable in dealing with them.
They are often passed down within families, so they elude social policies that are based on the notion that equality of opportunity can be created by government action.
Exploring the economic history of the Jews also reminds us that groups that are disproportionately successful are met by different political reactions.
Societies long oriented to economic dynamism tend to welcome the economically successful, viewing them as a source of mutual gains.
But cultures that tend to resent the economically successful – either as an affront to equality, or on the implicit assumption that the economic gains of some must be at the expense of others – tend to be more hostile toward Jews and given to conspiratorial theories to explain their economic success.
Some social scientists are wary of calling attention to the reality of disproportionate Jewish economic success for fear of arousing anti-Semitism, or contributing to conspiratorial theories about Jewish economic dominance.
No doubt, conspiratorial minds will always find fodder for their obsessions.
But the fact that the history of Jews and capitalism calls current social-scientific wisdom and method into question is all the more reason to explore the topic.
MADRID – After four long years of talks in Havana, Cuba, Colombian President Juan Manuel Santos has negotiated an end to successive governments’ armed conflict with the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the most resilient insurgent group in Latin America.
Colombia’s civil war, which lasted for six decades, has killed an estimated 220,000 people and displaced another six million.
Ending it was a remarkable feat of diplomacy, and Santos deserves the world’s applause.
Indeed, he should be far and away the leading candidate for this year’s Nobel Peace Prize.
Three significant factors led to the peace accord: the Colombian armed forces’ increased effectiveness, which enabled them to decimate the FARC’s ranks;
Santos’s previous diplomatic groundwork, wherein he repaired Colombia’s previously fraught relations with neighboring Venezuela, Ecuador, and Bolivia, an axis that had long contributed to sustaining the FARC by providing logistical and political support; and, finally, Cuba’s new policy of rapprochement with the United States, which Santos was wise to exploit in his own efforts to make peace.
With the conditions for negotiations in place, Santos also had to address the root cause of the conflict.
He did this by signing the Victims and Land Restitution Law in June 2011, in the presence of UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon.
The law was a watershed, because it simultaneously pacified violent regions, delivered justice for millions of dispossessed peasants, radically improved standards of living, and blunted the appeal of a guerrilla group that used the banner of land reform to justify its untold atrocities.
It even drew praise from the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights in Colombia for its special provisions for women and children survivors of human rights abuses, and for those targeted for their perceived sexual orientation.
While not flawless, the Victims and Land Restitution Law clearly helped pave the way for peace and national reconciliation in Colombia.
Indeed, none other than the FARC’s former leader, Alfonso Cano (the nom de guerre of Guillermo Sáenz Vargas), acknowledged this in 2011.
Inevitably, the Colombian government’s transitional-justice regime to end the conflict and re-assimilate the FARC into the Colombian political process has some detractors, and has divided the Colombian electorate.
Former President Álvaro Uribe is now leading those who stridently oppose the peace deal on the grounds that it does not go far enough to punish FARC militants.
Nonetheless, the accord signed in Havana is historic and innovative, because it emphasizes truth-telling without eschewing justice altogether.
Its focus is not on vengeance and retribution, but on “restorative justice,” a principle Archbishop Desmond Tutu used to describe South Africa’s transition to majority rule after apartheid.
The Colombian model of transitional justice acknowledges that national reconciliation is achievable only if the communities broken by the long, savage war are repaired and revitalized.
In other words, Colombia’s approach to transitional justice puts the victims first – more so than any peace process seen in recent years.
Victims’ delegations even joined the Havana talks and met with the FARC leadership that was responsible for so many past atrocities.
The Colombian government’s pioneering approach seems to have benefited from a gender sub-commission that considered proposals from nongovernmental organizations representing women’s rights and the LGBT community.
The government was also wise to establish a special sub-commission to examine the history of the bloodshed, because disagreement about the past often constitutes an insurmountable obstacle to peace and reconciliation.
Colombian domestic politics should now move to the forefront of attention, because peace processes are vulnerable to public opinion.
While war often unites countries, peace tends to divide them, because it inevitably requires concessions and sacrifices.
Peace comes at a cost, and people often disagree about who should foot the bill.
For a democratic leader, negotiating peace is – perversely – riskier than waging war.
This is especially true for an asymmetric peace process between a democratically elected government and an unaccountable non-state actor, which doesn’t have to worry about upcoming elections, opposition political parties, the press, or a skeptical public.
Despite these enormous constraints, the Santos government never deviated from proper democratic procedures.
It considered proposals from popular assemblies around the country, and it maintained transparency throughout the process.
Santos has overcome formidable challenges, and the next one is a forthcoming plebiscite, where the Colombian people, one hopes, will recognize that their country has furnished a conflict-ridden world with a new model for peace.
The international community should take note of this and assist Colombia in the difficult transition ahead as it implements policies in accordance with the new agreement.
The post-conflict phase will be no less demanding than the peace process itself.
NEW YORK – When Donald Trump defeated Hillary Clinton in the United States’ presidential election, the market’s immediate negative response was to be expected.
But by the next day, the market’s downward turn had already reversed itself.
US equities and bond yields rallied after Trump delivered a victory speech that seemed to signal that he was tacking to the center, which investors had originally expected him to do this summer, after he won the Republican nomination and entered the general election campaign.
In his speech, Trump promised to be a president for all Americans, praised Clinton for her past public service, and vowed to pursue massive fiscal-stimulus policies centered on infrastructure spending and tax cuts for corporations and the wealthy.
Markets will give Trump the benefit of the doubt, for now; but investors are now watching whom he appoints to his administration, what shape his fiscal policies actually take, and what course he charts for monetary policy.
During his campaign, Trump threatened the US Federal Reserve’s independence, and heaped criticism on Fed Chair Janet Yellen.
But Trump is a real-estate mogul, so we cannot immediately assume that he is a true monetary-policy hawk, and not a closet dove.
His campaign rhetoric may have been directed at the Republican Party base, which is full of Fed-bashing gold bugs.
Trump could appoint hawks to the two Fed Board seats that are currently vacant, and he will certainly replace Yellen when her term expires in 2018.
But it is unlikely that he will force her to resign before then, because markets would punish such an obvious violation of central-bank independence.
Even if Trump does choose a hawk to replace Yellen, his appointee would be only primus inter pares on the Federal Open Market Committee.
Yellen’s successor would not be able simply to impose his or her view on the FOMC’s seven-member Board of Governors and five Reserve Bank presidents.
While the Fed did resemble an absolute monarchy under former Chairman Alan Greenspan, it became more of a constitutional monarchy under Greenspan’s successor, Ben Bernanke.
This transformation cannot be reversed: each FOMC member holds strong views about which direction monetary policy should take, and each is willing to dissent when needed.
This means that a radical hawk appointed by Trump could end up in the minority, and would be consistently outvoted by the FOMC’s dovish majority.
Of course, Trump may be able to change the Fed Board’s composition over time, by appointing new governors when Stanley Fischer, Lael Brainard, Daniel K. Tarullo, and Jerome H. Powell’s terms end.
But if he takes this route, the market will still police the Fed’s actions.
If continued low growth and low inflation do not justify rapid interest-rate increases, a hawkish Fed that raises rates anyway will face harsh disciplining by the market – and, by extension, so will Trump.
Moreover, premature and excessive hawkishness would strengthen the US dollar and sharply increase the US trade deficit, undermining Trump’s stated goal of creating jobs and boosting incomes for his blue-collar, working-class electoral base.
If Trump cares about his base – or if he at least wants to avoid a political backlash from it – he should appoint dovish Fed governors who will favor easy-money policies that weaken the dollar.
Ironically, President Barack Obama’s appointees, such as Brainard and Tarullo, are actually ideal for Trump’s agenda.
If Trump does choose a more hawkish monetary-policy approach, it will have an ambiguous impact on the dollar, owing to his other proposals’ downstream effects.
Looser fiscal policy and tighter monetary policy should, as in former President Ronald Reagan’s first term, strengthen the dollar; but if Trump pushes the US toward protectionism, he will generate economic and geopolitical tail risks that would weaken the dollar and increase US country risk.
Similarly, Trump’s fiscal policies would also weaken the dollar over time – after an initial significant appreciation – as the substantially higher deficit spending would be financed either with easy money or bond issues that increase US sovereign risk.
The net impact of all these factors on the dollar will all depend on how loose fiscal policy becomes, and on how tight monetary policy becomes.
Trump’s proposed policy mix would also have an ambiguous – and modest – impact on growth, if he appoints hawks to the Fed.
Looser fiscal policy would help short-term economic growth; but tighter monetary policy would undercut those gains.
Similarly, if Trump really does want to redistribute some income from capital to labor, and from corporate profits to wages (admittedly a big “if”), his policies could boost consumption; but his populist, protectionist policies would undermine business confidence, and thus capital expenditures, while reducing consumers’ purchasing power through higher inflation.
Equity markets will undoubtedly favor Trump’s proposals to loosen fiscal policy, deregulate business and finance, and cut taxes.
But investors will be on the lookout for protectionism, Wall Street- and immigrant-bashing, and overly aggressive monetary hawkishness.
Only time – and the market – will tell if Trump has struck the right balance.
NEW YORK – Global growth seems to be moving, slowly but surely, along the path to recovery.
The International Monetary Fund’s latest World Economic Outlook predicts 3.5% global growth this year, up from 3.2% last year.
But there’s a hitch: the easy monetary policies that have largely enabled economies to return to growth are reaching their limits, and now threaten to disrupt the recovery by creating the conditions for another financial crisis.
In recent years, the world’s major central banks have pursued unprecedentedly easy monetary policies, including what a recent Deutsche Bank report calls “multi-century all-time lows in interest rates.”
That, together with large-scale quantitative easing, has injected a massive $32 trillion into the global economy over the last nine years.
But these unconventional policies are turning out to be a classic game-theoretic bad equilibrium: each central bank stands to gain by keeping interest rates low, but, collectively, their approach constitutes a trap.
In today’s globalized world, a slight reduction in interest rates by an individual central bank can bring some benefits, beginning with weakening the currency and thus boosting exports.
But the more countries employ this strategy, the greater the strain on the banking sector.
This is already apparent in Europe, where bank equity prices have dropped steadily in recent months.
Moreover, low and especially negative interest rates make holding cash costly, prompting investors to seek riskier investments with higher potential returns.
As a result, collateralized loan obligations (CLOs) have more than doubled this year, reaching an overall market value of $460 billion.
That looks a lot like the surge in collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) that helped to drive the 2008 financial crisis.
While the world has implemented more checks and balances for CLOs than it did for CDOs before the crisis, the trend remains deeply worrying.
Finally, persistently low interest rates can cause people to worry about their retirement funds, spurring them to save more.
Far from boosting consumption, as intended, monetary stimulus may create an environment that dampens demand, weakening prospects for economic growth.
The United States, which might have taken the lead in the past, has ceded its global leadership position in recent years – a process that has been greatly accelerated during the first year of Donald Trump’s presidency.
Moreover, the G20 has lately lost steam in supporting closer coordination of monetary and fiscal policies among the world’s major advanced and emerging economies.
Perhaps a new grouping of the major players – the GMajor? – needs to step up, before it is too late.
To gain the needed motivation, monetary policymakers should recall the “traveler’s dilemma,” a game theory parable that highlights the pitfalls of individual rationality.
The parable features a group of travelers, returning home with identical pottery purchased on a remote island.
Finding that the pottery has been damaged in transit, they demand compensation from the airline.
Because the airline manager – known as the “financial wizard” – has no idea what the price of the pottery is, a creative solution is needed to determine the appropriate amount of compensation.
The manager decides that each traveler should write down the price – any integer from $2 to $100 – without conferring with one another.
If all write the same number, that figure will be understood as the price, and thus the amount of compensation each traveler receives.
If they write different numbers, the lowest number will be taken as the correct price.
Whoever wrote the lowest number would receive an additional $2, as a reward for honesty, while anyone who wrote a higher number would receive $2 less, as a penalty for cheating.
So if some write $80 and some $90, they will receive $82 and $78, respectively, in compensation.
The pottery has no actual monetary value, but if they each write $100, all can receive $100 in compensation.
One traveler, however, quickly realizes that writing $99 would be a better option, because it would garner that extra $2 reward, and thus a total of $101.
That traveler quickly realizes, however, that others must have had the same idea, and so decides to put down $98 instead.
In the end, trapped by this inexorable logic, all travelers end up writing and receiving $2.
The outcome may seem a disaster, but it is also the most rational choice – the “Nash equilibrium” of the traveler’s dilemma game.
The invisible hand of the market does not always lead individually self-interested agents to a collectively desirable outcome.
Unless central bankers take that message to heart, they will find themselves sweeping up a lot of broken pottery.
They may be as mistaken about Brazil as world football experts were earlier this summer.
When the World Cup began, you will recall, the Brazilian team was deemed talented but flawed.
Indeed, in recent years, Brazil has created a vibrant democracy with a strong economy.
Not all Americans are enthused about President Bush's rapid conversion of trillion dollar surpluses into deficits, nor does a majority embrace his proposals to privatize America's social security system, which has done so much to eliminate poverty among America's elderly.
On key issues within Brazil, however, a broad political consensus (not unanimity, but no one should expect that!) exists, and this includes all the major contenders in Brazil's forthcoming presidential election in October.
There is a consensus, for instance, on sound fiscal and monetary policies: no one wants to return to the hyperinflation of earlier decades.
Brazil's monetary policy has been managed extraordinarily well by Arminio Fraga (my former student), but behind him is a strong institution , with the analytic capacities of a first world Central Bank.
The initiative that Brazil's Central Bank made to increase transparency and openness are a model for central banks throughout the world--in the developed world as well as the less developed.
To be sure, there may be disagreements about fine-tuning the economy, but such are routine in any democracy.
There is also a broad consensus that while markets are at the center of a successful economy, there is an important role for government.
Brazil's government, for instance, pushed one of the most successful telecom privatizations, but also pushed for stronger competition and regulatory policies.
Unlike America, when the country faced an electricity crisis, it didn't blithely sit by, saying let market forces (which in the US, meant market manipulation by Enron and others) "handle" the matter; rather, the government came in with strong actions.
As an American, I looked on in envy as Brazil managed its way through a difficult situation.
It may be called an emerging market, but it has first rate financial, educational and research institutions.
Discussions about economics in Sao Paulo are as sophisticated as in New York.
University seminars in Rio are as lively as those in Cambridge, Mass or Cambridge U.K.
It produces one of the finest airplanes in the world--so good that competitors in the more advanced industrial countries have tried to impose trade barriers.
But Brazil, for all of its strengths, has one critical weakness: a high level of inequality.
It is a weakness that (unlike in America) also carries a broad consensus: most agree that it needs to be addressed, and that government has the obligation to do so.
Ten yeas ago, 20% of Brazil's school age children were not attending school; now that number is down to 3%.
Whoever wins the election almost certainly will continue to make further investments in education.
Similarly, landless peasants are both an economic and a social problem, and the current administration has taken on vested interests to push forward on an exciting market-based land reform, one which has received support from the World Bank.
Whoever wins the election will in all likelihood pursue a strong land reform program.
With the AIDS epidemic, Brazil faces challenges to its health system, and while one may agree or disagree with the particular approaches taken by the Brazilian government, this much is clear: everyone recognizes that this is a major responsibility of government.
Brazil's debt to GDP ratio is moderate--better than in the US at the time Bill Clinton became president, far better than that of Japan and several European countries.
Unlike its neighbor to the south (prior to Argentina's crisis), Brazil has a flexible exchange rate system: its currency is not overvalued--if anything, it is undervalued.
With strong exports, it should have no problem meeting its debt obligations, so long as interest rates do not soar to levels that turn a problem into a self-fulfilling prophecy.
Brazil has carved out a path that is not based on ideology or over-simplistic economics.
It seizes opportunities while confronting and dealing with harsh realities, whether these are lack of education, landlessness, or AIDS.
By successfully charting its own course, Brazil has created a broad domestic consensus behind a balanced, democratic, market economy.
Brazil's victory in the World Cup may have no connection with these reforms, but the creativity of that winning team does say a great deal about the spirit of the country.
BERLIN – If there are any geologists in millions of years, they will easily be able to pinpoint the start of the so-called Anthropocene – the geological age during which humans became the dominant influence on our planet’s environment.
Wherever they look, they will find clear evidence of its onset, in the form of plastic waste.
Plastic is a key material in the world economy, found in cars, mobile phones, toys, clothes, packaging, medical devices, and much more.
And the figure keeps growing; by 2050, it could be four times higher.
Despite requiring resources to produce, plastic is so cheap that it often is used for disposable – often single-use – products.
As a result, a huge amount of it ends up polluting the earth.
Larger pieces can fill with rainwater, providing a breeding ground for disease-spreading mosquitos.
Up to 13 million tons of plastic waste end up in the ocean each year; by 2050, there could be more plastic in there than fish.
The plastic that washes up on shores costs the tourism industry hundreds of millions of dollars every year.
Beyond the dead or dying seals, penguins, and turtles that had the bad fortune of becoming entangled in plastic rings or nets, biologists are finding dead whales and birds with stomachs stuffed with plastic debris.
While the plastics used, say, to package our foods are usually nontoxic, most plastics are laden with chemicals, from softeners (which can act as endocrine disruptors) to flame retardants (which can be carcinogenic or toxic in higher concentrations).
These chemicals can make it through the ocean and its food chain – and onto our plates.
Addressing the problem will not be easy; no single country or company, however determined, can do so on its own.
Many actors – including the biggest plastic producers and polluters, zero-waste initiatives, research labs, and waste-picker cooperatives – will have to tackle the problem head-on.
The first step is to create a high-level forum to facilitate discussion among such stakeholders, with the goal of developing a cooperative strategy for reducing plastic pollution.
Such a strategy should go beyond voluntary action plans and partnerships to focus on developing a legally binding international agreement, underpinned by a commitment from all governments to eliminate plastic pollution.
Negotiations on such a treaty could be launched this year, at the United Nations Environment Assembly in Nairobi in December.
One of the authors of this article proposed a convention modeled after the Paris climate agreement: a binding overarching goal combined with voluntary national action plans and flexible measures to achieve them.
A research team from the University of Wollongong in Australia, taking inspiration from the Montreal Protocol, the treaty that safeguards the ozone layer, has suggested caps and bans on new plastic production.
Some might ask whether we should embark on yet another journey down the long, winding, and tiresome road of global treaty negotiations.
Biodegradable plastics, for example, make sense only if they decompose quickly enough to avoid harming wildlife.
Even promising discoveries like bacteria or moths that can dissolve or digest plastics can provide only auxiliary support.
Technology might be able to help, offering more options for substitution and recycling; but, as the many zero-waste communities and cities around the world have shown, it is not necessary.
For example, Capannori, a town of 46,700 inhabitants near Lucca in Tuscany, signed a zero-waste strategy in 2007.
With 82% of municipal waste now separated at source, just 18% of residual waste ends up in landfills.
Such experiences should inform and guide the national action plans that would form part of the treaty on plastics.
The European Commission’s “circular economy package” may provide another example worth emulating.
Though it has not yet been implemented, its waste targets have the potential to save the European Union 190 million tons of CO2 emissions per year.
Any international treaty on plastic must therefore include a funding mechanism, and the “polluter pays” principle is the right place to start.
The global plastic industry, with annual revenues of about $750 billion, surely could find a few hundred million dollars to help clean up the mess it created.
A comprehensive, binding, and forward-looking global plastics treaty will not be easy to achieve.
It will take time and cost money, and it will inevitably include loopholes and have shortcomings.
It is, after all, a global scourge that is entirely of our making – and entirely within our power to solve as well.
NEW DELHI – India’s parliamentary system, inherited from the British, is rife with ineffiencies.
By the logic of Westminster, you elect a legislature to form the executive, and when the executive does not command a secure majority in the legislative assembly, the government falls, triggering fresh elections.
The result is a vote in some or other of India’s 29 state assemblies every six months or so, each one acting as a sort of referendum on the government in New Delhi.
In short, India’s freewheeling multi-party democracy has become one of perennial plebiscite.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) prevailed in Uttar Pradesh – India’s largest state, which is home to more than 200 million people and has produced seven of 15 prime ministers – and in neighboring Uttarakhand.
The main opposition party, the Indian National Congress, triumphed in the northwestern state of Punjab and won pluralities in Goa and Manipur (though the BJP formed governments in the latter two states anyway, by assembling coalitions to ensure legislative majorities).
But India’s national politics has long been skewed toward the Hindi-speaking northern heartland, and Uttar Pradesh has far more voters than the other four states combined.
So the results have been hailed as a victory for the BJP, affirming Modi’s popularity and vindicating his leadership – including of the campaign itself.
Indeed, Modi personally commanded the campaign in Uttar Pradesh, whose fabled city of Varanasi he represents in parliament.
With his attendance at multiple political events and addresses to innumerable campaign rallies, Modi staked his government’s image – and, some would say, his own reputation as prime minister – on the election.
Victory in Uttar Pradesh was critical to enable Modi to take control of India’s Upper House, whose members are elected by state legislative assemblies.
The latest election results also assure him the legislative numbers he needs to get his own candidates elected as India’s President in July and Vice-President in August.
One clear downside of India’s perennial electioneering is that prime ministers must frequently leave aside their role as leader of the country to act as leader of their party.
Modi is a take-no-prisoners campaigner, who revels in punchy invective and freely launches partisan attacks at opponents (including me).
There’s nothing statesmanlike about it, and yet it will happen again soon, with a fresh round of elections, including in Modi’s home state of Gujarat, due before the end of the year.
If there ever were need for yet another clinching argument for a presidential system in India, it is the spectacle of the head of government abandoning the responsibilities of that office every few months to go on the stump for their party.
The parliamentary system has not merely outlived any good it could do India; it was never well suited to Indian conditions.
Like the American revolutionaries two centuries ago, Indian nationalists fought for “the rights of Englishmen,” which they thought the replication of the Houses of Parliament would epitomize and guarantee.
When former British Prime Minister Clement Attlee, as a member of a British constitutional commission, suggested the United States’ presidential system as a model for India, the country’s leaders “rejected it with great emphasis.”
Attlee recalled, “I had the feeling that they thought I was offering them margarine instead of butter.”
Indeed, while a parliamentary system can work in a small, largely homogenous country, in India’s large, diverse, and fractious polity, it has been messy, to say the least.
The system’s apologists point out that it has kept India together and given every citizen a stake in the country’s political destiny.
The question is which form of democracy would also ensure effective performance, without allowing the government to be constantly distracted by petty politics.
Perhaps the answer lies in the US or Latin American model, with a directly elected chief executive – a president, at the national level, and a governor, at the state level – serving a fixed term as both head of state and head of government.
A directly elected chief executive would not be vulnerable to the shifting sands of legislative support.
They could appoint a cabinet of talented officials, confident in the stability of their tenure.
Above all, they could devote their energies to governance, rather than just to politics.
In such a system, citizens would actually be voting for the individual they want in charge.
The president could therefore claim to speak for a majority of Indians, rather than a majority of members of parliament.
At the end of a fixed period of time – say, five years, as India’s MPs are currently accorded – the public would be able to judge their leader’s success at improving citizens’ lives, rather than at keeping a government in office.
Pluralism is a fundamental element of who we are, and we are proud of it.
But few Indians are proud of the kind of politics our democracy has inflicted upon us.
In order to confront the challenges and meet the needs of one-sixth of the world’s population, India’s leaders must operate within a democracy that enables, rather than hampers, governance.
It would enable leaders to focus on representing the people, instead of on staying in power.
With a more expansive and predictable election cycle, India’s leaders would be able to move beyond the unpleasant business of political contention, and settle down to governance.
Fake news – and fake allegations of fake news – now plagues civil discourse, and political parties have proved increasingly willing to use xenophobia and other malign strategies to win elections.
At the same time, revisionist powers like Vladimir Putin’s Russia have been stepping up their efforts to interfere in elections across the West.
Rarely has the United States witnessed such brazen attacks on its political system; and rarely has the world seen such lows during peacetime.
When I was a student in Delhi in the early 1970s, it was commonly assumed that the US “participated” in Indian elections.
Then as now, rumors circulating through informal communication channels made it hard for ordinary citizens to tell fact from fiction.
The joke – which was not always a joke – was that if you suspected someone of being a CIA agent, you should immediately phone the local Indian intelligence office, but you should not be surprised if the same person answered the phone.
The United Kingdom will soon leave the European Union, with or without a formal exit agreement.
And the US is waging an escalating trade war, which could be followed by a debilitating currency war.
How can all of this be happening in democracies, and what can be done about it?
On the first question, one hypothesis is that new digital technologies are changing the structural incentives for corporations, political parties, and other major institutions.
The wealth of proprietary data on consumer preferences and behavior is producing such massive returns to scale that a few giants are monopolizing markets.
In other words, markets are increasingly geared toward a winner-take-all game: multiple corporations can compete, but to the victor go the spoils.
The benefits of winning an election have become so large that political parties will stoop to new lows to clinch a victory.
And, as with corporations, they can do so with the help of data on electoral preferences and behavior, and with new strategies to target key constituencies.
If a “bad” party is willing to foment hate and racism to bolster its chances of winning, what is a “good” party to do?
If it sticks to its principles, it could end up ceding victory to the “bad” party, which will do even more harm once it is in office.
A “good” party may thus try to forestall that outcome by taking a step down the moral ladder, precipitating a race to the bottom.
When second place confers no benefits, the cost of showing unilateral restraint can grow intolerably high.
In light of today’s crisis of democracy, we would do well to revisit Václav Havel’s seminal 1978 essay “The Power of the Powerless.”
First published as samizdat that was smuggled out of Czechoslovakia, the essay makes a simple but compelling argument.
Dictatorships and other seemingly omnipotent forms of authoritarianism may look like large, top-down structures, but in the final analysis, they are merely the outcome of ordinary individuals’ beliefs and choices.
Havel did not have the tools of modern economic theory to demonstrate his argument formally.
In my new book The Republic of Beliefs, I show that the essence of his argument can be given formal structure using elementary game theory.
This, in turn, shows that ordinary individuals have moral options that may be unavailable to the big institutional players.
The “power of the powerless” has a key role to play in saving democracy.
Unlike corporations and political parties, ordinary citizens are not locked into winner-takes-all games, because they can make small moral commitments without incurring intolerable costs.
If there are just two companies in the sector, the one that refuses to violate minimal labor standards risks losing the entire market to an immoral competitor, which can ultimately sell its shoes more cheaply.
But if consumers show that they will pay a little more for shoes that are made without violating labor standards, they can undercut the immoral firm’s advantage.
The bulk of classical voting theory, pioneered by the mathematical statistician and economic theorist Harold Hotelling and the economist and political theorist Anthony Downs, assumes that people vote in their self-interest.
Yet if citizens decide that they will vote in their self-interest within the restraints of a moral code, immoral campaign practices would suddenly impose a cost, rather than confer an advantage.
A similar view is expressed in Sebastian Haffner’s unfinished memoir, Defying Hitler.
As Cass Sunstein, commenting on Haffner, put it, “the ultimate safeguard against aspiring authoritarians, and wolves of all kinds, lies in individual conscience.”
For ordinary citizens to develop and abide by such moral codes, we need, at a minimum, better civic education, so that people understand the latent power they wield and so that users of digital platforms learn to check the sources of news stories they encounter.
I believe there are corporations and political groups that actually want to adhere to minimal moral standards but cannot, for fearing of losing everything.
Voters need to learn that their electoral and consumption decisions can fundamentally alter the nature of the game that corporations and politicians play.
WASHINGTON, DC – Sub-Saharan Africa is confronting a pronounced rise in public debt.
At the end of 2017, average public debt in the region was 57% of its GDP, an increase of 20 percentage points in just five years.
While this is well below the peaks of the early 2000s, the current spike is concerning.
Government borrowing to finance public investments is an essential part of any country’s macroeconomic toolkit.
Over the last two decades, countries in Sub-Saharan Africa have used this option often, greatly improving human development outcomes as a result.
For example, between 1990 and 2015, average life expectancy increased, infant mortality rates were halved, secondary school enrollment soared, and infrastructure gaps narrowed.
But this progress could be jeopardized if current debt trends in some countries continue.
Africa’s increasing public-debt burden means higher interest costs, which divert resources from education, health care, and infrastructure.
According to our most recent Regional Economic Outlook for Sub-Saharan Africa, six of the region’s 35 low-income countries (LICs) are in “debt distress,” meaning they are unable to service external commitments.
A further nine LICs are classified as being at “high risk of debt distress.”
For starters, the region’s commodity exporters, and particularly its oil exporters, were hit hard by the 2014-2016 slump in prices.
Africa’s lost output and associated debt increases are comparable to the experience of advanced economies following the global financial crisis.
Today, eight of the region’s fifteen debt-troubled LICs are commodity exporters.
Additionally, most countries that have funded development and infrastructure through borrowing have failed to generate sufficient additional tax revenues to repay that debt.
In many cases, countries have not been effective at capturing the return on their investments through their tax systems.
Finally, in many Sub-Saharan countries, portions of the debt build-up can be traced to shocks in the migration of liabilities – such as losses by state-owned enterprises – to the public-sector balance sheet and exchange-rate depreciations.
In a handful of countries, poor governance can also be blamed for unsustainable debt practices.
As we have been saying for some time, if governments stick to their medium-term fiscal-consolidation and reform plans, debt levels should stabilize or decrease, alleviating debt-related challenges.
However, the required adjustments have been delayed repeatedly, owing to political constraints, social pressure for much-needed development spending, and favorable external financing conditions.
This is a recipe for long-term pain; there is no scope to delay the adjustment any longer.
As countries work to meet their development goals, it is essential that they move debt sustainability to the top of the policy agenda.
For this to happen, four key areas will need special attention, depending on country circumstances.
First, in resource-intensive countries, especially the region’s eight oil exporters, fiscal consolidation plans must be enacted without delay.
This should be coupled with economic diversification, for which the recent recovery in commodity prices provides wider scope.
In much of the rest of the region, the required fiscal adjustment is more modest and can be achieved through steady increases in tax revenues.
In most cases, there is potential to raise revenue by 3-5 percentage points of GDP over the next few years.
Reaching this level will require broadening the tax base, streamlining exemptions, and strengthening the administration of value-added tax.
Third, efforts should be made to account for off-balance-sheet risks, improve debt-management capacity, and enhance data coverage of debt and debt exposure.
But, faced with growing public-debt vulnerabilities, it is unclear how long this trend can continue.
Sub-Saharan Africa’s economies should orchestrate a transition from public to private investment by strengthening regulatory and insolvency frameworks, increasing intra-African trade, and deepening access to credit.
Sub-Saharan Africa’s public-debt burden has not yet hindered investment demand.
On the contrary, as a measure of GDP, foreign financial flows to Africa are higher than those to emerging markets, and they come from a broader range of sources.
So-called frontier economies have issued record levels of sovereign bonds, while bilateral creditors, like China, continue to invest heavily.
But, as we have seen recently, capital flows are fickle, and if Sub-Saharan Africa is to take full advantage of the current global economic upswing, policymakers must tackle public-debt vulnerabilities head-on while they can.
Doing nothing will only constrain the region’s tremendous potential to achieve sustainable and inclusive growth.
PRAGUE - One feature that makes a human being human is awareness of his or her own dignity.
This awareness may naturally take many forms in people of different character, social circumstance, cultures or civilizations, or different periods of time.
I am, however, deeply convinced that no human being fails to understand the meaning of humiliation, insult, rape or enslavement.
All people recognize an attack on human dignity, which is actually an attack on the essence of humanity.
It is true that we may be, for valid reasons, troubled or irritated by a thousand and one things that have accompanied the dramatic reconstruction of democracy, market economies and civil society in Central Europe.
But no person of sound judgement can deny that the restoration of liberties, which until recently were suppressed or limited, allows our citizens at last to live in dignity.
Leading a worthy life no longer demands the sacrifice it once did, and people are thus better equipped to be true to themselves in this important dimension of their existence.
True to themselves; but what about others, and what about the wider community, the nation at large?
Should citizens love their state, why they should feel attached to it, what kind of attachment should this be, why, indeed, should people make sacrifices for the sake of independent statehood?
It is time, I believe, for people in this region to perceive the state as a tool for the defense of their homes, and thus of a part of themselves.
Readiness to defend the state is a specific manifestation of a human being's sense of personal dignity.
If we rebel against humiliation, insult or enslavement as individuals; if we defend our individual human dignity and resist attacks that threaten it; we do -- indeed we must do -- precisely the same as a community that has established a state, because the state is, among other things, an instrument to protect our life together in freedom.
In other words: readiness to defend a democratic state and its values against violence, aggression and evil should be nothing less than a natural extension of the inherent will of each individual to defend one's own dignity against potential threats.
It is simply a way of implementing this will -- in those cases where this cannot be done in any other way -- through joint organized action in pursuit of a common interest.
It would be a fatal error to believe that since we spend money on armed forces to this end, national defense is solely a military affair to which the rest of the population need not pay attention.
Preparation of effective defense of the state is unthinkable without a greater or lesser degree of participation of all the state's institutions.
In a democratic state these engage in the defense effort only insofar as society understands the importance of defense in the first place.
It is thus necessary to remind ourselves time and again that defending the state means first and foremost defending the human dignity of every one of us.
The new republics of the region, face no concrete or visible enemy at present.
As a result, many consider defense expenditures a luxury, if not an outright waste of money.
Modern European history gives us ample evidence that wars and suffering are most likely when democracies underestimate self-defense in peacetime, or fail to summon enough readiness to defend themselves before it is too late.
It is precisely now, when no immediate threat looms, that defense must be contemplated.
It is now, with the first chance ever to build broad structures designed to defend the democratic world that people must demonstrate a serious commitment to defense effort.
It is now, when a new political and security order for the European continent is beginning to emerge, that we must clearly show our readiness to take our share of responsibility for peace and for the defense of human dignity with all the values that safeguard it.
It is my belief that the Czech army will never again be confronted by an adversary threatening war, and that its future assignments will not go beyond participation in international peace-enforcement operations.
But even if an army were not needed, its importance would still remain unchanged.
An army will always remain an unequivocal expression of the shared will to live in freedom, to defend freedom and to engage in joint efforts in order to ensure freedom for others as well.
Furthermore, the army will always remain a school of discipline, loyalty to the country, coexistence, and solidarity, and thus also a school of civic virtue, including civic pride and self-confidence.
Building confidence in the state means reinforcing that which safeguards a worthy, free, safe and happy life for us all as a community, and thus also as individuals.
If we want to be a community of people who enjoy living together in a shared home, who love that home and who govern the state democratically, we all must understand the meaning of the sacrifices that we make, or are prepared to make, to ensure the defense of our new states.
WASHINGTON, DC – Much of the hype surrounding last month’s meeting in Moscow of G-20 finance ministers and central bankers was dedicated to so-called “currency wars,” which some developing-country officials have accused advanced countries of waging by pursuing unconventional monetary policies.
But another crucial issue – that of long-term investment financing – was largely neglected, even though the endgame for unconventional monetary policy will require the revitalization or creation of new long-term assets and liabilities in the global economy.
The collapse of Lehman Brothers in 2008 drove up risk premia and triggered panic in financial markets, weakening assets in the United States and elsewhere, and threatening to provoke a credit crunch.
In order to avoid asset fire-sales – which would have led to the disorderly unraveling of private-sector balance sheets, possibly triggering a new “Great Depression” or even bringing down the eurozone – advanced countries’ central banks began to purchase risky assets and increase lending to financial institutions, thus expanding the money supply.
While fears of meltdown have dissipated, these policies have been maintained or extended, with policymakers citing the fragility of the ongoing economic recovery and the absence of other, equally strong policy levers – such as fiscal policy or structural reforms – that could replace monetary policy quickly enough.
But several years of ultra-loose monetary policy in the advanced countries has led to significant liquidity spillover abroad, putting excessive upward pressure on higher-yielding developing countries’ currencies.
With developing countries finding it difficult to deter massive capital inflows or mitigate the effects – owing to economic constraints, like high inflation, or to domestic politics – the “currency wars” metaphor, coined in 2010 by Brazil’s finance minister, Guido Mantega, has resonated widely.
Moreover, only a small portion of the liquidity created by unconventional monetary policy has been channeled toward households and the small and medium-size enterprises that generate most new jobs.
Instead, crisis-affected global financial entities have used it to support their efforts to deleverage and to rebuild their capital, while large corporations have been building large cash reserves and refinancing their debt under favorable conditions.
As a result, economic growth and job creation remain lackluster, with the availability of investment finance for long-term productive assets – essential to sustainable growth – severely limited.
Some believe that the elimination of macro-financial tail risks, the gradual strengthening of global economic recovery, and the increase in existing asset prices will eventually convince cash hoarders to increase their exposure to new ventures in advanced economies.
In fact, at the recent G-20 meeting, the World Bank presented an Umbrella Report on Long-Term Investment Financing for Growth and Development.
The report, based on analysis from various international organizations, highlights several areas of concern.
For starters, banks’ current retrenchment of long-term investment financing is likely to persist.
After all, many of the advanced-country banks, especially in Europe, that dominated such investment – for example, financing large-scale infrastructure projects – are undergoing deep deleveraging and rebuilding their capital buffers.
Furthermore, the effect of internationally agreed regulatory reforms – most of which have yet to be implemented – will be to increase banks’ capital requirements while shrinking the scale of maturity transformation risks that they can carry on their balance sheets.
The “new normal” that results will likely include scarcer, more expensive long-term bank lending.
The World Bank report also points out that, as a consequence of banking retrenchment, institutional investors with long-term liabilities – such as pension funds, insurers, and sovereign wealth funds – may be called upon to assume a greater role in funding long-term assets.
But, to facilitate this shift, appropriate financing vehicles must be developed; investment and risk-management expertise will have to be acquired; regulatory frameworks will have to be improved; and adequate data and investment benchmarks will be needed.
These investors must focus on the small and medium-size enterprises that banks often neglect.
Finally, local-currency bond markets – and, more generally, domestic capital markets – in emerging economies must be explored further, in order to lengthen the tenure of financial flows.
Local-currency government-debt markets have performed fairly well during the crisis, while local-currency corporate-debt markets have played a more modest role as a vehicle for longer-term finance.
This suggests that domestic reforms aimed at reducing issuance costs, improving disclosure requirements, enhancing creditors’ rights frameworks, and tackling other inhibiting factors could bring high returns.
Anxiety over unconventional monetary policies and “currency wars” must not continue to dominate global policy discussions, especially given last month’s pledge by G-20 leaders not to engage in competitive currency devaluations.
Instead, global leaders should work to maximize the liquidity that unconventional policy measures have generated, and to use it to support investment in long-term productive assets.
Such an approach is the only way to place the global economy’s recovery on a sustainable footing.
BERLIN – German chancellor Angela Merkel likes to navigate politically by line of sight – and a very short line of sight at that.
But when fog clouds your visibility, you’re not an instinctive driver (as seems to be the case here), and you have misplaced your eyeglasses, you place not only yourself at peril, but others as well.
The ensuing damage for Germany and its international standing is plain to see: never has Germany been more isolated.
The country has lost its credibility with the United Nations and in the Middle East; its claim to a permanent seat on the Security Council has just been trashed for good; and one really must fear the worst for Europe.
UN Security Council Resolution 1973, which authorized the current mission to protect Libyans, had the explicit or tacit agreement of the Security Council’s five veto-wielding powers.
It also had the backing of a majority of the Council, the support of the Arab League and the Organization of the Islamic Conference, and the open military participation of two Arab states.
What use is vocal multilateralism, what use are German leaders’ lofty speeches about international law being exercised by the Security Council, if Germany refuses to endorse a resolution for the protection of Libya’s citizens from a brutal regime employing all means at its disposal in its fight for survival?
And that will not be forgotten in the region, in the UN, or among Germany’s friends.
All I can say is that I feel ashamed for this failure of the German government and – unfortunately – also for the leaders of the red and green opposition parties who at first applauded this scandalous mistake!
Foreign policy isn’t just about cutting a good figure on the international stage and otherwise focusing on the next domestic election.
It means taking responsibility for hard strategic choices even when these are unpopular at home.
And please spare me mention of the abstentions in the Security Council by Russia and China, which constituted a waiver of their veto and thus a de facto endorsement, clearing the way for intervention.
Germany’s abstention, on the other hand, is viewed as a simple “No,” because Germany has no veto and is also a key member of the European Union and NATO.
I don’t know what Germany’s foreign minister, Guido Westerwelle, could have been thinking.
He rightly sided with the Arab freedom movements, then – when the matter was decided – traveled to Cairo’s Tahrir Square to receive his applause, and then rightly called for Qaddafi’s overthrow and his rendition to the International Criminal Court, only to chicken out when it came to the Security Council vote.
The rationale has nothing to do with an ethical foreign policy or with German and European interests.
Germany’s government doesn’t want to get caught on a slippery slope and eventually have to commit ground troops in a civil war.
Well, if you’re afraid of slippery slopes, stay out of government, because balancing on all sorts of slippery slopes is what the job is about.
Of course, the mission in Libya is risky; it is unclear who the new local players will be and what the country’s future will look like.
But, given the alternative – a bloodbath unleashed by Qaddafi to reestablish his control over Libya – this cannot be a serious alternative to action.
Germany and other European countries went to Afghanistan in solidarity with a NATO partner – our most important security guarantor, the United States – after it had been attacked from there on September 11, 2001.
And solidarity within NATO – a term all but shunned these days in official German circles – is mutual: left to its own devices, Germany could one day wake up in a very precarious situation.
And Libya is certainly not Iraq, either, where the dominant Western power, the US, started a war for ideological reasons and against the majority of the Security Council, a war that that had to – and did – end in disaster.
It looks as if Merkel’s government today has adopted the position of Germany’s Greens back then!
But, while the rejection of humanitarian military intervention had an element of tragedy in that case, Germany’s behavior today is pure farce.
Like the Balkans, the far shores of the Mediterranean are part of the EU’s immediate security zone.
It is naive to assume that the most populous EU member state could and should keep out of a crisis situation in a region with immediate manifold European and German security interests.
What does the German government believe the consequences Qaddafi’s retention of power would be, both in humanitarian terms and in terms of Realpolitik?
Of all countries, Germany – which can almost be termed the inventor of the European Common Foreign and Security Policy – has now dealt that policy its most dangerous blow thus far.
From now on, the principle of a “coalition of the willing” will also apply in the EU, further weakening Europe.
And if you view Germany’s behavior in respect to Libya in connection with its whining and dithering regarding the consequences for Europe of the financial crisis, you can’t but start worrying about the future of both Europe and NATO.
Germany seems to be congealing into an introspective provincialism, and that at a time where its potential, its leadership even, are more urgently needed than ever.
FLORENCE – After the European Central Bank announced on May 9 that it would buy the government bonds of Mediterranean countries experiencing severe fiscal strains, critics complained that the Bank had “lost its virginity.”
The actions looked like a clear contravention of Article 21 of the ECB’s Statute, which forbids credit facilities to governments or to European Union institutions.
Similar comments were made about the US Federal Reserve in 2008, after it began large-scale purchases of non-conventional assets, including agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, in order to support the collapsing US housing market.
Former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker, for example, complained that the institution was operating at the bounds of legality.
In both cases, the central bank looked as if it was doing something other than traditional monetary policy.
In the past 30 years, a remarkable degree of consensus had been established that the primary, if not sole, responsibility of central banks was to ensure price stability.
Increasingly, since the early 1990’s, it had become fashionable to define price stability more precisely through the use of inflation targets.
Keeping prices roughly constant was a very different mission from the historical role of central banks.
In the original vision of central banking, price stability was not at all an obvious purpose, since the value of money was cast in terms of specific weights of precious metals.
First, they were to manage the state’s credit, almost inevitably in the wake of costly major wars.
This was how the oldest central banks, the Swedish Riksbank (1668) and the Bank of England (1694), came into being.
Likewise, another wave of central banks was founded in the early nineteenth century, with the Norwegian and Finnish banks following the example of the Banque de France (1800).
In each case, the new bank was closely tied to the interests and influence of a narrow political elite.
The banks looked as if they were devices to harness financial power to an existing but controversial and threatened political order.
More democratic regimes were, consequently, rather suspicious of the political implications of institutional innovation.
It was suspicion of the politics behind a designated state-oriented central bank that led to the non-renewal of the charters, and the demise, of the First and Second Bank of the United States.
Resistance to the process of political capture led in some countries (such as Switzerland) to opposition to establishing any central bank at all.
A second historical motivation for the creation of central banks involved the safeguarding of financial systems.
In the mid-nineteenth century, a new generation of central banks was established essentially to manage payments systems and stabilize fragile banking systems.
This was the motivation behind the founding of the German Reichsbank (1875), which was a response to the stock-market and financial collapse of 1873, and the US Federal Reserve System (1914), which was established in the wake of the major financial crisis of 1907.
In these cases, too, there was an obvious suspicion that the central bank was a tool of the financial elite.
The ECB is the first and purest example of a modern central bank that is concerned only with the issuance of money and price stability.
It absorbed much of the political inheritance of Germany’s Bundesbank, whose establishment after World War II reflected Allied insistence on breaking with German central banking’s past traditions, in which political subservience and close ties to the financial establishment undermined monetary stability, leading to inflation and the destruction of the currency.
There had been a prior attempt to create an institution that would deal with short-term support mechanisms for member states: the European Monetary Cooperation Fund, launched in 1973 and governed by a board of central bank governors.
Designated as a European Community institution, it was regarded as being dangerously political.
The ECB was also unlike older central banks in that it was not seen as a source of support for an integrated but potentially vulnerable banking system.
In the late 1980’s and early 1990’s, there were debates about whether the ECB should be responsible for banking supervision and regulation.
The answer was no – a decision that, in the wake of the 2007-2008 credit crisis, appears to have been a fundamental mistake.
In other words, in the face of the crisis, the ECB needs to behave much more like the older central banks.
In the first place, it is becoming an institution concerned with state debt, particularly with its term structure, and with ensuring that the market for that debt continues to operate smoothly, without episodes of breakdown and panic.
Second, it has become clear that, whether they like it or not, central banks bear major responsibility for financial-sector stability.
There are obvious risks: non-conventional monetary policy might be considered a sort of fiscal policy, in which the central bank is allocating or redistributing resources to a particular constituency: the housing market in the case of the US, or recipients of government largesse in the European case.
The transition to the new stance will involve a broader and much more political role for the central bank.
Hence there will inevitably be a demand for greater accountability, and even for the involvement of political authorities in the process of setting central-bank policies.
The choice for European central banking is now open: should it play around with multiple political partners, or should it settle down to stable marital bliss with a well-defined mechanism for responsibility and accountability?
CAMBRIDGE – Last month, the United States Congress succumbed to Citigroup’s lobbying and repealed a key provision of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act: the rule that bars banks from trading derivatives.
The Dodd-Frank law’s aim was to prevent another financial crisis like that of 2007-2008; the repeal reduces its chances of success.
Derivatives are contracts that derive their value from changes in a market, such as interest rates, foreign-exchange rates, or commodity prices.
Banks can use derivatives to hedge risk – say, by ensuring that oil producers to which they lend lock in today’s prices for their product through derivatives contracts, thereby protecting themselves and the bank from price volatility.
The borrower is thus more likely to be able to repay the loan, even if its product’s price falls.
But derivatives can also be used for speculative purposes, allowing banks to take on excessive risk.
The last crisis originated in the real-estate market, following a large and unexpected decline in home prices.
It then spread to financial institutions that could not cope with the losses associated with mortgage delinquencies, foreclosures, and the depreciation of housing-related securities.
Derivatives exacerbated the crisis, particularly after the portfolio of the bankrupt Lehman Brothers, then the world’s fourth-largest investment bank, was liquidated.
The next day, the US government had to extend an $85 billion bailout to American International Group (AIG), the world’s largest insurer, owing to its inability to back up its deteriorating derivatives position.
The Dodd-Frank rule that Congress just repealed, known as the “swaps push-out rule,” would have required that most derivatives-trading activities occur outside of government-insured banks.
Though it does not formally guarantee anything else, it usually finds it easiest and quickest to bail out the entire bank – including its derivatives facility.
If, however, derivatives are no longer embedded in the guaranteed bank, the government could more easily bail out a bank, while leaving the derivatives subsidiary to fend for itself.
This sub rosa government indemnification of major banks’ derivatives portfolios undermines financial stability.
If a major bank defaults on its derivative trades, the banks with which it has traded could also fail.
If several large, interconnected derivatives-trading banks collapse simultaneously, the financial system could be paralyzed, damaging the real economy – again.
And it is the large banks that are building up their derivatives portfolios the most.
Indeed, this is another pernicious, albeit subtle, effect of the sub rosa guarantee of banks’ derivatives portfolios: the knowledge that, if a large bank fails, it will probably receive a government bailout – including for its derivatives desk – spurs traders to focus their dealings on big banks.
Smaller independent dealers that the government could allow to fail thus become less appealing.
This explains, at least partly, why a handful of mega-banks in the US – namely, Citibank, Goldman Sachs, Bank of America, and Morgan Stanley – handle the bulk of derivatives trading.
That creates a vicious cycle: the bailout option for too-big-to-fail banks concentrates the derivatives market among a few major institutions, increasing further their systemic importance.
By separating derivatives trading from government-insured banks, it would have effectively eliminated the sub rosa subsidy.
While the government would still have to back deposits for crisis-stricken banks – even if that meant bailing out the entire institution – it would have had the option of allowing the derivatives trading desks, functioning within separate organizations, to flounder.
This would have helped to undermine the perception that large derivatives dealers are invulnerable, thereby reducing their trading advantage.
Mid-size dealers that could fail without causing excessive economic damage would get more business.
Against this background, the repeal of the push-out rule was a mistake.
It is possible that US regulators (and Congress) are so confident in the other steps they have taken to safeguard the financial system that they no longer believe this extra protective layer is necessary.
But Citigroup’s success in lobbying for the rule’s repeal could also signal that regulatory efforts to mitigate systemic financial risk have reached the high-water mark in the US.
If Citigroup – a poorly managed operation that had to be bailed out in the last crisis – could compel Congress to abandon such a rule, it is reasonable to ask whether the political tides have shifted, and financial regulation will not be tightened further.
Perhaps, with each budget bill, Dodd-Frank will be rolled back further.
Specifically, they should revisit the consensus that banks will become gradually safer, and their required capital should amount to no more than 10% of their assets.
If the banks are successfully lobbying for the right to pursue riskier activities, regulators should consider raising their capital requirements.
Only a few years have passed since the last financial crisis – and its effects are still being felt.
NEW YORK – Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe is once again stirring Asia’s cauldron of national rivalries and historical resentments.
This time, he has instructed a committee of historians to reexamine the official apology delivered in 1993 to World War II-era sex slaves held in Japanese military brothels.
It is clear from various recent statements that some of Abe’s closest advisers believe that the apology was not in order, so the committee might well conclude that Japan was never officially involved in prostitution, and that its “sincere remorse” should therefore be withdrawn.
Glossing over, or denying, dark chapters of national history is not unique to Japan, of course.
There is no room for Stalin’s mass murders in the kind of “patriotic” education favored by Russian President Vladimir Putin.
And the Tiananmen Square Massacre, to name but one bloody event in China’s recent past, has been officially forgotten.
The official apology made in 1993 was prompted by a Japanese historian’s discovery of documents showing that the Imperial Japanese Army had been directly involved in setting up, though not necessarily in running, what were known as “comfort stations.”
One of the official reasons was that widespread rape of Chinese women by Japanese soldiers was provoking too much resistance among the local population.
But, because there was no escape, the women, once ensnared in the system, were effectively slaves.
This has been officially admitted, so why reopen the ghastly business now, at a time when rescinding the apology would make Japan’s already-strained relations with China and South Korea many times worse?
If Abe and his allies were cosmopolitan in their outlook, with a deep understanding of, or concern for, other countries, the decision to revisit the 1993 apology would indeed be extraordinary.
But, as is true of many political leaders, especially on the nationalistic right, they are chauvinistic provincials whose concerns are almost entirely domestic.
In their efforts to revise the historical record, they are not really thinking of Koreans or Chinese, but of political adversaries at home.
The views of the Japanese on their country’s wartime history are deeply divided, reflecting political battle lines drawn in the immediate aftermath of the war, when Japan was under Allied occupation.
The United States, which ran the occupation, was keen to reform Japanese society in such a way that another war would be unthinkable.
Worship of the emperor was abolished, though Hirohito remained on his throne.
Education was purged of all militaristic and “feudal” elements, including favorable references to the samurai spirit.
A new pacifist constitution, written by the Americans, banned the use of armed force.
And Japan’s wartime leaders were tried in Tokyo by Allied judges for “crimes against peace” and “crimes against humanity.”
Most Japanese, heartily sick of war and military bullying, were happy to go along with all of this.
But there was always a right-wing minority that felt humiliated and resentful of the loss of national pride and, more important, national sovereignty, for Japan’s security would henceforth have to depend entirely on the protection offered by the US.
One of the main leaders of this group of disgruntled nationalists was Nobusuke Kishi, Abe’s grandfather.
Kishi’s aim was to regain Japanese pride and sovereignty by revising the constitution and reviving old-fashioned patriotism, thus undoing some of the American educational reforms.
He failed, because most Japanese were still allergic to anything that smacked of militarism.
Until not long ago, there was a strong left-wing current in education and some of the media that used Japan’s horrendous wartime record as an argument against any kind of revisionism.
But, as long as the Japanese left used history to make this political argument, the nationalists pushed back by claiming that stories of wartime atrocities had been greatly exaggerated.
Books about the infamous Nanking Massacre of 1937, or the enslavement of “comfort women” in military brothels, were denounced as “historical masochism” or dismissed as “the Tokyo Trial View of History.”
The left was accused of being complicit in spreading foreign – Chinese, Korean, or American – propaganda.
This, then, is the modern Japanese version of populism: the “liberal elites,” by falsifying the history of Japan’s glorious war to “liberate Asia,” undermined the Japanese people’s moral fiber.
Because the ideological collapse of left-wing politics in Japan has been as precipitous as in much of the Western world, the so-called liberal elites have lost much of their former influence.
As a result, the voice of the nationalist right has grown louder in recent years.
That is why Abe can get away with appointing cronies to the board of NHK, the national broadcasting company, who openly claim that the military brothels were an entirely private enterprise and that the Nanking Massacre was a foreign fabrication.
He is upsetting allies in Asia, embarrassing the US, and making bad relations with China even worse.
Like Putin, he is driving himself and his country into further isolation for entirely domestic reasons.
In a region increasingly dominated by Chinese power, he will be without Asian friends.
After all, a Japan that is isolated in Asia will be even more dependent on the US, the wartime victor, which Abe and his nationalist allies hold responsible for the postwar order that they seek to revise.
NEW YORK – A striking symmetry is emerging in debates about the future of higher education around the world.
On the one hand, there is growing concern that the United States and many European countries are failing to prepare enough university graduates in the fields driving the twenty-first century “knowledge economy,” such as engineering and information technology.
This fear has led to the narrowing of the concept of education to mean the acquisition of practical skills.
On the other hand, the worry in some parts of Asia is that young people entering the work force with strong technical training lack sufficient experience “thinking outside the box.”
This fear is manifesting itself in an incipient effort to expand education to include the cultivation of feeling and imagination.
In the US, where most undergraduates bear at least part of the cost of their university education, political pressure is mounting to provide incentives like tuition discounts or loan forgiveness to students of science, technology, engineering, or mathematics (the so-called STEM fields).
Cost-cutting measures, such as compressing traditional four-year degree programs into three years – thereby reducing or eliminating elective courses in “impractical” subjects like literature, philosophy, and fine arts – are also being discussed.
Meanwhile, in Hong Kong, Singapore, and China, there are calls for extending university programs so that students can obtain a broad, liberal education, in the hope that graduates will be more inclined to experiment and innovate.
Hong Kong University, for example, has extended its undergraduate programs from three years to four.
But such a narrow, economics-based view fails to account for the larger questions of value that societies worldwide are facing.
To be sure, progress in any field, from commerce and communications to health and environmental science, will become increasingly dependent on technological innovation, and thus on the high-order skills – acquired through intensive technical training – that drive it.
It is also true, however, that such training does not provide an adequate foundation for addressing the more abstract, but profoundly important, questions that ultimately must guide global policy and decision-making.
· How can the imperative of economic development be reconciled with the need to limit climate change?
· What does national sovereignty mean in a world where diseases, pollutants, and terrorists cross national borders at will?
· How should limited resources be distributed in order to provide opportunity and hope to young people, while treating the elderly with dignity and respect?
· What are a country’s obligations to refugees fleeing from persecution, poverty, or strife elsewhere?
In answering such questions, advances in science and technology (for example, new methods of energy production, surveillance, or online learning) will have a key role to play.
But moral and ethical questions never yield fully to technical solutions; they also require an understanding of humanity’s social and cultural heritage.
Science can help us to attain the life we want, but it cannot teach us what kind of life is worth wanting.
As human affairs become increasingly complex and morally exigent, future generations will need both scientific and humanistic learning – and they will need them more than ever.
Fortunately, promising new models for making education more coherent and capacious are emerging.
Yale University and the National University of Singapore have worked together to establish Yale-NUS, Singapore’s first liberal arts college.
Led by a literary scholar and an astronomer, this new residential college aims to break down interdisciplinary boundaries and enable students to learn from one another.
Likewise, Quest University in Canada encourages students to bring both scientific and humanistic knowledge to bear on today’s most pressing problems.
For example, North Carolina State University’s Benjamin Franklin Scholars program – a collaboration between the College of Engineering and the College of Humanities and Social Sciences – aims “to produce well-rounded professionals who are analytical problem-solvers, ethical decision-makers, and effective communicators.”
Unfortunately, such programs largely lack the visibility and influence needed to shape educational reform.
It is time to abandon the “either/or” discourse that pits science against humanities – which the British chemist and novelist C.P. Snow identified more than a half-century ago as an obstacle to human progress.
It is time to seek out best practices that bridge this putative divide, and scale them up.
In the important work of adapting educational institutions for the future, we must not lose sight of their core mission as articulated in the past.
No one has expressed that mission better than Benjamin Franklin, a man of letters and a scientific innovator, who defined education as the quest for “true merit.”
“True merit,” Franklin wrote, consists in “an inclination joined with an ability to serve mankind, one’s country, friends, and family; which ability is…to be acquired or greatly increased by true learning; and should, indeed, be the great aim and end of all learning.”
BASEL – When it comes to health care, all stakeholders – patients, service providers, pharmaceutical companies, and governments – know that something needs to change.
For decades, health-care spending has increased faster than economic growth by an average of two percentage points in OECD countries.
And, as the population ages and the incidence of chronic disease rises, the problem will only get worse if it is not addressed.
This is especially true in developing countries’ health-care systems, which often confront tighter resource constraints than health care in developed countries.
Today, the world’s largest socioeconomic group, often referred to as the “bottom of the pyramid,” comprises three billion people who live on less than $2.50 per day.
In low-income countries, nine million people, mostly children, die each year from infectious diseases, including malaria, diarrhea, and AIDS.
I believe, however, that traditional corporate-responsibility efforts, such as donating medicines to patients who cannot afford health care, are no longer enough.
They do not address the root cause of the problem, which is much deeper than a pricing issue.
In order to have a lasting impact on health care and quality of life in the developing world, we need to focus on addressing the larger societal challenges that affect the overall healthcare ecosystem.
In order to ensure sustainable health systems, we need to help communities to build capabilities in these areas.
And we need to do this in a way that does not seek simply to implement “one-size-fits-all” models.
We need to tailor our approach in each market to fit local customs and health priorities.
For example, in India, 830 million people live in rural areas, presenting immense challenges in terms of distribution of medicines.
As a result, an estimated 65% of the total population does not have access to adequate health care.
Novartis has had some success in addressing this issue through our Arogya Parivar, or “Healthy Family,” program.
Arogya Parivar is centered on recruiting and training residents of remote villages to become “health educators,” who, along with qualified doctors, organize “health camps” – mobile clinics that provide access to health screenings and a robust portfolio of treatment options.
This includes select over-the-counter products, which we sell in smaller, more affordable packages, helping to keep patients’ weekly out-of-pocket costs low.
Since the beginning of Arogya Parivar, we have improved access to medicine for 42 million patients in 33,000 villages.
Similarly, in China, despite rapid urbanization, millions of people still live in nomadic communities, making it difficult to educate patients on critical health issues, particularly disease prevention.
Novartis sought the most effective channel to reach these patients, and ultimately found that teaching children about health and hygiene in schools works best.
We have been making progress in China’s remote Xinjiang province through our Jian Kang Kuai Che, or “Health Express” initiative, which gives local health-care professionals access to training at urban hospitals through remote education sessions and consultations.
Finally, in Africa, there are still countries like Zambia, where more than three-fifths of the population lives in rural areas, and many must walk or drive long distances for health care.
Moreover, the quality of medicines available at health facilities varies greatly, and supplies are not reliable.
That is why we have forged a partnership with the Zambian government to scale up a countrywide system of pharmacies in order to bring basic medicines to remote villages, and to build the country’s health-care infrastructure.
We can also expect that mobile health care will be able to make a positive impact on supply-chain management, education, and compliance in places like Africa.
Through the SMS for Life program, an innovative public-private partnership led by Novartis, we use everyday technology, including mobile phones, text messages, and electronic-mapping technology to track weekly stock levels of malaria medicines at public-health facilities.
This has helped us to maintain adequate stocks, broaden access to essential medicines, and, we hope, reduce the number of malaria deaths in developing countries’ rural areas.
Each of these programs, or, as we call them, “social ventures,” provides societal benefits beyond improving access to health care or simply donating medicines.
They strengthen local infrastructure, improve education, create jobs, and drive economic growth.
This is the kind of change that we need in order to make a lasting impact on health-care systems worldwide.
We need to think about more than drug pricing and donations, and consider how we can help communities to maintain a high quality of life after aid goes away.
This implies a major shift in mindset – one that I believe we need to undergo for the sake of our world’s long-term health.
MILAN – The world’s developed countries face growth and employment shortfalls, while developing countries are confronting huge challenges in adapting to increasingly volatile capital flows while adjusting their growth patterns to sustain economic development.
And yet America’s political dysfunction has come to marginalize these (and other) crucial issues.
The threat of a default on US sovereign debt has been lifted – for now – but the deeper problem persists: For America’s Republicans and Democrats, negotiating a fiscal grand compromise appears to carry higher costs than playing a game of brinkmanship, even at the risk of default.
Surely this involves a collective miscalculation of the longer-term costs.
Setting aside the external impact on the global economy, the damage to domestic stability and growth from anything other than a short-term technical default would be so severe that the political system (and both parties with it) could not withstand the backlash.
Domestic and foreign holders of US Treasury bills would regard a deliberate, unforced default as a betrayal of trust.
Some are reassured by this fact, because it suggests that a real default will not happen.
And that means that the fragile global economy, dependent (for now) on a single country for its main reserve currency, can withstand America’s political shenanigans.
That may be true, and it may be the only practical choice in the short run.
But the US pattern of decision-making (or non-decision-making) has already created additional risk.
It will surely be reflected in upward pressure on interest rates, at which point the Federal Reserve will enter the picture.
Far from tapering its monthly purchases of long-term assets, one can easily imagine a scenario in which the Fed’s already substantial balance sheet would have to expand even more quickly to counter the negative economic effects of an unplanned – and rapid – rise in borrowing costs.
And this comes at a time when many (including me) believe that strengthening US economic growth makes an orderly withdrawal from policy-assisted growth the wise course, both domestically and internationally.
The eurozone still faces rebalancing and structural challenges, but it has managed to create a window of stability in sovereign-debt markets.
In the case of a US default, however, it would start to attract capital inflows, causing the euro to rise, adding to already-substantial headwinds to growth and employment, and making recovery in its damaged peripheral economies nearly impossible.
Measures to counter “excessive” capital inflows – of the type introduced in Brazil and Malaysia – might be needed.
China and other sovereign holders of US debt face capital losses over and above those implied by the inevitable appreciation of their currency.
One is reminded of the external consternation expressed during the 2008 crisis at the possibility of a default on debt carrying an implicit government guarantee.
In March 2009, Zhou Xiaochuan, the governor of the People’s Bank of China, argued that the dollar’s role as the main international reserve currency was not in the interest of the global economy or of the US itself.
In an expanding global economy, the supplier of the reserve currency is pushed to run current-account deficits – and hence toward a leveraged-growth model that systematically erodes its strength and independence as it becomes increasingly reliant on foreign capital and foreign asset ownership.
Now we can see that the global economy is dependent not only on the strength of the reserve-currency country, but also on its values – particularly, on its continued willingness to put critical international commitments ahead of domestic disputes.
For starters, it will reinforce the notion that policies and policy disputes are to be conducted with a view to domestic issues and interests, independent of the systemic global effects – even as those effects grow larger.
Indeed, some factions within the US political system do not appear to understand the large adverse feedback effects on the domestic economy from a disruption in the global financial system.
Second, external holders of US sovereign debt will almost certainly begin to view Treasuries as risky assets and, where possible, to diversify away from them.
That is not necessarily bad – wholesale dumping of US sovereign debt is highly unlikely, as that would be self-destructive for many countries, including China – but the transitions could be bumpy.
Third, the willingness to hold America’s creditworthiness hostage for domestic political purposes will almost surely accelerate the decline of US influence in global economic governance and management.
In the short to medium term, that decline may create a vacuum and lead to volatility and heightened risk, because, as many have noted, there are few candidates to replace the US.
To be fair, the trend toward diminished US influence – and, ultimately, shared responsibility for global economic governance and stability – was already underway, and in a sense is inevitable.
The hope was that the transitions would be gradual and stable, with the US playing a leadership role as it has in most of the postwar period.
Finally, the US default risk may revive Zhou’s 2009 agenda (perhaps premature at the time) and accelerate the search for a workable alternative to the single-country reserve-currency model, which has outlived its usefulness.
In the end, no one wants the global system to be vulnerable to a single country’s domestic political fights.
The global economy faces tremendous trials in the coming years: growth, employment, and distributional challenges in many advanced and developing countries; far-reaching institutional reform in Europe; the complex middle-income transition in China; and the continuing need to reduce poverty worldwide.
Managing them effectively requires designing a system of global governance in which one country’s internal politics cannot jeopardize all countries’ prospects.
